53129
Yorkshire_and_the_Humber
 url  http://www.lgyh.gov.uk//Yorkshire and the Humber is one of the nine of England and formally one of the government office regions. It covers most of the historic county of Yorkshire, along with the part of northern Lincolnshire that was, from 1974 to 1996, within the former county of Humberside. The population in 2006 was 5,142,400. The British Government has announced its intention to abolish Government Offices (for the Regions) no later than 31 March 2011.Geographical contextSee areas of Yorkshire and of YorkshireGeologyIn the Yorkshire and the Humber region there is a very close relationship between the major topographical areas and the underlying geology.() The Pennine chain of hills in the west is of Carboniferous origin. The central vale is Permo-Triassic. The York Moors in the north-east of the county are Jurassic in age while the Wolds and Wolds to the south east are Cretaceous chalk uplands.(RiversThe region is drained by several rivers. In western and central Yorkshire the many rivers empty their waters into the River Ouse which  reaches the Sea via the Estuary.()  The most northerly of the rivers in the Ouse system is the Swale, which drains Swaledale before passing through Richmond and meandering across the of Mowbray. Next, draining Wensleydale, is the Ure, which joins the Swale east of Boroughbridge. The Nidd rises on the edge of the Dales National Park and flows along Nidderdale before reaching the of York.(The Ouse is the name given to the river after its confluence with the Ure at Ouse Gill Beck. The Wharfe, which drains Wharfedale, joins the Ouse upstream of Cawood.( The Rivers Aire and Calder  are more southerly contributors to the River Ouse and the most southerly Yorkshire tributary is the River Don, which flows northwards to join the main river at Goole. In the far north of the county the Tees flows eastwards through Teesdale and empties its waters into the North Sea downstream of Middlesbrough. The smaller River Esk flows from west to east at the northern foot of the North York Moors to reach the sea at Whitby.(The River Derwent rises on the North York Moors, flows south then westwards through the of Pickering then turns south again to drain the eastern part of the Vale of York. It empties into the River Ouse at on the Marsh.(  To the east of the Yorkshire Wolds the Hull flows southwards to join the Humber Estuary at upon Hull. The western Pennines are served by the Ribble which drains westwards into the Sea close to St Annes.(The highest point of the region is Whernside, in the Dales, at . The largest freshwater lake is Mere in the Riding of Yorkshire.File:Humber Bridge South Bank2.jpg|thumb|right|The Bridge ClimateThis region of England generally has cool summers and relatively mild winters with the upland areas of the York Moors and the Pennines experiencing the coolest weather and the of York the warmest. Weather conditions vary from day to day as well as from season to season. The latitude of the area means that it is influenced by predominantly westerly winds with depressions and their associated fronts, bringing with them unsettled and windy weather, particularly in winter. Between depressions there are often small mobile anticyclones that bring periods of fair weather. In winter anticyclones bring cold dry weather. In summer the anticyclones tend to bring dry settled conditions which can lead to drought. For its latitude this area is mild in winter and cooler in summer due to the influence of the Stream in the northern Ocean.Air temperature varies on a daily and seasonal basis. Cities such as Sheffield, Leeds, and Bradford are generally cooler due to their inland and upland location, while York, Hull, and Wakefield are warmer due to their lowland location. The temperature is usually lower at night and January is the coldest time of the year and July is usually the warmest month.()Snow is not uncommon in the winter, Yorkshire is mostly hilly/mountainous, and the Yorkshire Dales and the Pennines can experience extreme snowstorms with high snowdrifts. Snow in coastal towns such as Hull and Scarborough are not as common because they are moderated by the ocean, while inland/upland settlements such as Skipton or Ilkley experience more snow.Climate data for settlements in the region:dateFebruary 2011 date  October 2010  dateAugust 2010 dateAugust 2010SettlementsFile:Infirmary Street, Leeds.jpg|thumb|right|Leeds, the largest settlement in the regionThere are seven cities in Yorkshire and the Humber: Bradford, upon Hull,  Leeds, Ripon, Sheffield, Wakefield and York.  There are many other large towns in the area such as Doncaster, Grimsby, Halifax, Huddersfield  and Scunthorpe.  Leeds is the largest settlement with a metropolitan population of 770,800.  Leeds is now one of the largest financial centres in the United Kingdom.  Sheffield is the second largest settlement and is a large manufacturing centre.  Bradford is the third largest city and was traditionally a textile city, the decline of these industries has left Bradfords economy more diverse.  Kingston upon Hull is the main port in the region and also a notable fishing harbour.  While cities such as Bradford, Leeds and Sheffield grew during the industrial revolution, there are older cities in the region such as Wakefield and York.The tallest occupied building in Yorkshire is Place in central Leeds, commonly referred to as The Dalek, and at 361 feet is the 34th tallest building in the UK, built in 2007. The 37 storey Plaza in Leeds is the worlds second tallest student accommodation building at 338 feet, and the second tallest building in the region, and the UKs 42nd tallest building, built in 2009. The 32-storey Pauls Tower is now the tallest building in Sheffield at 331 feet. The Hallamshire Hospital is the tallest hospital in the UK outside of London at 249 feet, and was built in 1979.Local governmentThe official region consists of the following subdivisions:()Key: county   | county  *HistoryIt was originally called Yorkshire and Humberside, and defined as Yorkshire, Yorkshire, Yorkshire and Humberside. Since then, Humberside has been abolished, and the councils of West and South Yorkshire abolished.  The older form of the name is still occasionally seen.Industrial historysteel was invented in 1913 by Brearley of Sheffield, working for Brown Steels (now called Forgemasters). steel had been invented in the 1740s by Huntsman of Epworth in Lincolnshire (part of the region).Scientific heritageHarrison of upon Humber (but born in Yorkshire at Foulby), invented the chronometer which allowed longitude to be accurately measured, and hence navigation at sea. This allowed Captain Cook of Whitby to colonise much of Australia. Harrison also invented the strip and the rolling bearing, without which most vehicles could not move. Hoyle was an important physicist from Bingley, who discovered how stars made chemical elements.CultureThe area is well known for its brass bands, with the and Rastrick Brass Band, Dyke Band, Colliery Band, Main Frickley Colliery Band, Temperance Band and Saltaire Band. Brass bands have mostly been linked with coal mines.The family are the regions best known authors. The regions most popular city for tourists is York.Regional assemblyFile:Wakefield - Cathedral.jpg|thumb|left|CathedralThe and Humber Assembly was a partnership of all local authorities in the region and representatives of various economic, social and environmental sectors. The full Assembly normally met three times a year, normally in February, June and October. The full Assembly is responsible for providing regional leadership, agreeing regional strategic priorities, directing the development of the Integrated Regional Framework and endorsing key regional strategies. Membership comprises all 22 local authorities in this region, plus 15 Social, Economic and Environmental partners, and the National Parks for planning purposes.()On 31 March 2009, the Assembly was abolished and replaced by Government Yorkshire and Humber, which continues to be based in the former Assembly premises in King Street in Wakefield.()()Yorkshire is one of the two regions (along with the North West) that were expected to have a referendum about the establishment of an elected regional assembly. When the North East region of England rejected having an elected regional assembly in a referendum, the then Deputy Prime Minister Prescott  announced that he would not move orders for other referendums before the relevant provisions expired in June 2005.European ParliamentThe European constituency of Yorkshire and the Humber is coterminous with the English region. After the European Parliament election in June 2009, Yorkshire and the Humber is represented by one Conservative (previously two one now Liberal Democrat), one Labour, one UKIP, two Liberal Democrat (one formerly Conservative) and one BNP MEPs.  It is one of two regions in the UK to have elected an MEP from the BNP.() Election results 2009 File:Sheep and Ingleborough. - geograph.org.uk - 226106.jpg|thumb|140px|right|Ingleborough in the Dales - the second highest point in the regionFile:Yorkshire Pudding.jpg|thumb|140px|right|puddingsFile:Fountains Abbey, 1.jpg|thumb|140px|right|Abbey near Ripon Elected candidates are shown in bold.  Brackets indicate the number of votes per seat won.European Election 2009: Yorkshire and The Humber()()DemographicsPopulation, density and settlements()The region has fewer degree-educated adults than the England average. The region has the UKs highest rate of cancer.Teenage pregnancyFor top-tier authorities, Kingston upon Hull has the highest teenage pregnancy rate, closely followed by East Lincolnshire. For top-tier authorities, Yorkshire has the lowest teenage pregnancy rate. For council districts, Ryedale has the lowest rate, closely followed by Craven. Only North Yorkshire has council districts in the region.Rotherham had the UKs youngest grandmother - 26 years old. Her 12 year old daughter gave birth on 26 August 1999.(Britains youngest grandmother)Social deprivationFor multiple deprivation in England, measured by the of deprivation 2007,() the most deprived council districts in the region are, in descending order - Kingston upon Hull (11th in England), Bradford (32nd), Doncaster (41st), Barnsley (43rd), North East Lincolnshire (49th), Sheffield (63rd), Wakefield (66th), Rotherham (68th), Kirklees (82nd), Leeds (85th), and Scarborough (97th). These areas are mostly represented by Labour MPs, with a few Conservative MPs representing parts of Leeds (with a Lib Dem MP) and North East Lincolnshire, and all of Scarborough. Apart from Scarborough, they are unitary authorities.The least deprived districts are, in descending order - Harrogate, Hambleton, Richmondshire, Craven, and Selby - all in North Yorkshire. Like all of North Yorkshire, they are represented by Conservative MPs. At county level, the least deprived areas are, in descending order - North Yorkshire, York and the East Riding of Yorkshire which all have roughly the same level of deprivation, and lower than the majority of England, including Cheshire and Northamptonshire.The region as a whole is one of the more deprived in England, measured by having far more Lower Layer Super Output Areas (LSOAs) in the 20% most deprived districts than the 20% least deprived districts.Kingston upon Hull has the highest proportion of NEETs in the region (and fairly high for the UK - 10.6%).()() This is another demographic extreme it shares with Knowsley in Merseyside.In March 2011 the region had the third highest overall unemployment claimant count in England with 4.4%. For the region, Hull has the highest rate with 7.8% which is the highest for any English district; East Lincolnshire is next with 6.4%, and Doncaster has 5.2%. Richmondshire has the lowest rate with 1.8% and Harrogate is next lowest with 1.9%.(Claimant count)ElectionsIn the 2010 general election, the region was evenly split between Labour and Conservative; 35% of the regions electorate voted Labour, 33% Conservative and 23% Liberal Democrat.() However Labour have almost twice as many seats than the Conservatives with 32 Labour, 18 Conservative and 3 Liberal Democrat. The Conservatives gained 10 seats, with the other two parties losing seats; there was a 6.6% swing from Labour to Conservative. However although Labour has around 60% of the regions seats, the geographic spread is mostly Conservative, due to the Labour seats having a much smaller geographic area. All of Yorkshire is Labour apart from the Liberal seat of Sheffield Hallam (the least deprived area of South Yorkshire), and Labour is concentrated in the other coalfield areas and Hull. TransportTransport policyAs part of the national transport planning system, the Regional Assembly is required to produce a Regional Transport Strategy (RTS) to provide long term planning for transport in the region. This involves region wide transport schemes such as those carried out by the Agency and Rail.(	)Within the region the local transport authorities plan for the future by producing Local Transport Plans (LTP) which outline their strategies, policies and implementation programmes.(	 ) The most recent LTP is that for the period 2006&ndash;11. In the Yorkshire and The Humber region the following transport authorities have published their LTP online: Riding of Yorkshire U.A.,(	) upon Hull,(	) East Lincolnshire U.A.,(	) Lincolnshire U.A.,(	) Yorkshire,(	) Yorkshire,(	) Yorkshire(	) and York U.A.(	)RoadThe motorway is Yorkshires main east-west thoroughfare, and north-south routes are the M1 and the A1, with only the A1 continuing further north, with an upgrade to motorway status currently being built between Dishforth and Leeming. The other main north-south road in the region is the A19.() The M180 (continuing as the A180) connects the ports at Grimsby and Immingham via the M18 (route E22).The A64 road connects areas in the North East of the region to the main body of motorways. The M1 was originally designed to finish at the A1 at Doncaster; this section became the M18. The section from the Interchange to Leeds was essentially designed to replace the A61, which is still the main road that connects the centres of Sheffield, Barnsley, Wakefield and Leeds, and continues through Harrogate and Ripon to Thirsk. The M180 is shadowed by the A18, which is the main road through Scunthorpe. The single-carriageway A1079 connects Hull to York, and has been exceeding its designed capacity for many years.The main north-south and east-west routes interchange at a series of junctions to the South and East of Leeds, near Castleford. Leeds and Bradford have inner-city urban motorways, while Sheffield has the Parkway and Hull has the Clive Sullivan Way (A63) which connect the city centres with the motorway network.  Leeds has a inner-ring road network made mostly out of purpose-built motorway stretches which is mostly sub-terrain to the north of the City Centre. Bradford, Huddersfield, Sheffield and York have inner-ring roads made by re-aligning existing roads while Halifax has a town-centre relief scheme made up of the Aachen Way and the North Bridge flyovers.The Bridge, the tallest bridge in the UK at 538 feet, was the worlds longest suspension bridge from 17 July 1981 until 5 April 1998. It was built to connect with a proposed new town near the A15/M180 interchange.RailFile:Overview of Leeds City railway station 04.jpg|thumb|right|City railway station is the busiest in the region.The central hubs of the rail network in the region are Leeds, Sheffield and York. The Coast Main Line passes through Leeds and York, operated by East Coast which is based in York, and the UKs only state-owned train company. The Main Line finishes at Sheffield, with a less regular service to Leeds, operated by Midlands Trains. East-west routes are the TransPennine to Manchester, and TransPennine through Doncaster.()  Leeds has a fairly extensive commuter network and an electrified section in the North of Bradford provides many commuter services. Sheffield has a smaller commuter rail network and there are also less extensive systems in Doncaster, Huddersfield, Wakefield and Harrogate, which connect the districts of the settlements to the centre by rail. The express service between Leeds and Huddersfield is notably quick.SYPTE and WYPTE subsidise commuters travel with discount schemes. Tram-trains have also been proposed in the area, however no scheme has yet been approved. Hull is now connected to the capital with its much-improved Hull Trains service. North Yorkshire has a skeleton train network, with Scarborough and York being the main destinations. The Coast Line connects Hull to Scarborough. The to York Line runs along the north of the Humber through Selby, and takes in Sherburn-in-Elmet and nearby rural stations south of York, being of great use to commuters to York since being reopened in the 1980s.HST heads North to York - geograph.org.uk - 330481.jpg|thumb|140px|left|The HST set the current world speed record for diesel trains near Thirsk in 1987South of the Humber, Scunthorpe and nearby rural stations are connected by a branch of the main to Hull Line (through Doncaster), via the branch from Hatfield and Stainforth, run by Rail. Grimsby is connected (also through Scunthorpe) on TransPennine Expresss South TransPennine route from Sheffield (originating at Manchester Airport).The region is home to a rail land speed record. On 1 November 1987, a British Rail HST travelled at 238 km/h between Northallerton and Thirsk. The train consisted of cars 43102 (City of Wakefield)(City of Wakefield train) and 43159, and three Mark 3 carriages. This is the world speed record for diesel trains, which used the Valenta engine.(HST record)Mass transitthumb|right|Sheffield Supertram in 1998Only Sheffield has its own mass-transit system, the Supertram, owned by SYPTE and run by Stagecoach. Leeds and Bradford have more developed commuter rail systems but lack any mass transit system.  The Supertram was an approved scheme in Leeds, however the funding was pulled and the scheme has been replaced by the proposed Trolleybus scheme.  In the past Bradford, Huddersfield, Kingston upon Hull, Leeds, Rotherham, Sheffield and York have all had mass-transit systems.AirFile:Leeds Bradford International Airport terminal, left.jpg|thumb|right|Bradford International Airport is the busiest in the region.Airports in the region are Bradford International Airport at Yeadon, Hood Airport Doncaster Sheffield (which opened in April 2005 on the former Finningley) near Doncaster and Airport (which opened in April 1974 on the former Kirmington) near Brigg in Lincolnshire.  Leeds Bradford International Airport is the largest in the region by passenger numbers, Robin Hood boasts the longest runway (2.7 km) of any airport in the region and Humberside Airport boasts an active heliport.Sheffield Airport formerly served the city of Sheffield, however the airport struggled to attract many scheduled services and closed following the opening of Robin Hood Doncaster Sheffield Airport.Lying outside of the region Tees Valley Airport (former Middleton St. George) serves the northernmost areas of the region, being next to the River Tees, and less than a mile from Dinsdale on Yorkshires northern edge. There are day and night direct rail connections from the region to Airport.()  Express coach services also run directly to Heathrow Airport from the region.WaterPride of Rotterdam ferry operates from HullHull has daily ferries (former North Sea Ferries) to Zeebrugge and Rotterdam (Europoort).()  Hull also has a large freight port and an active fishing port.  Immingham carries much freight transport via Tor Line and the Line.  Goole is Britains most inland port and is used mostly for importing commodities such as coal and timber.The region also has a canal network.  The and Liverpool Canal links West Yorkshire with the North West and the and Calder Navigation links Leeds and the coal fields of West and North Yorkshire with the ports to the East of the region.  There are also several smaller canals in the region, often built for quite specific purposes.  Many stretches of the smaller canals in the region have been backfilled.EconomyFile:Drax Power Station - geograph.org.uk - 583582.jpg|thumb|right|power stations 850 foot chimney is the tallest in the UKForward is the Development Agency charged with improving the Yorkshire and Humber economy, where some 270,000 businesses contribute to an economy worth in excess of 80 billion. With over 5 million people living in the region it ranks alongside some small countries including Ireland, Greece, Norway and Singapore.() The region has the second lowest rate of GVA in England. However Leeds has a much higher average GVA than most of South Yorkshire. Link Yorkshire(Business Link Yorkshire) is on the Capitol Business Park in Dodworth, west of the M1 near Barnsley near the bypass (A628). The regions Advisory Service is at (Manufacturing Advisory Service) is in Potternewton next to Allerton Hospital, on the former A61, with two other offices at the Manufacturing Park, Catcliffe off the A630 Parkway, and also on St. Georges Road in the west of Hull.Yorkshire and the Humber, the regional strategic health authority, is at the roundabout at the bottom of Kirkstall Road in Leeds, with another office ion the north of Sheffield. The charity-funded Air Ambulance is based at Leeds Bradford Airport and Bagby, near Thirsk. The state-funded Ambulance Service is based next to Coca-Cola on the Wakefield 41 Business Park, near the A650.Yorkshire in the past has been synonymous with coal mining. Many pits closed in the 1990s, with only two in the Pontefract area left at Kellingley and Sharlston. In South Yorkshire, there is Main Colliery and Colliery at Stainforth. The NUM was very Yorkshire-dominated. Coal still plays a part in the economy - there are three large power stations along the Aire Valley, with Drax being the second largest in Europe with 3,945 MW of capacity. The distribution area once looked after by the regional electricity company Electricity is now looked after by YEDL, owned by Electric UK.East and NorthScunthorpe is where steel is smelted by Steel Europe (former Corus Group before September 2010) in the east of the town; Wonder crisps are made in Frodingham, opposite the steel works; also Food Solutions (another plant was in Keynes before October 2007) make all the beef patties for McDonalds in the UK and Ireland at their factory in Crosby in the north-west of the town, processing around 7000 cattle a week - about 12,000 kg an hour. Grimsby is home of Englands fishing industry (although most fish is transported from the Peterhead area of Scotland via road), and has many frozen food factories such as Bluecrest. There are two large oil refineries at Immingham, owned by ConocoPhillips (Jet) and Total. Kimberly-Clark make all of its Huggies nappies for Europe at Barton-upon-Humber.There is a BP chemical works at Saltend in Hull. International, the chemical company, is in Cowick. & Nephew and Benckiser medical and household products companies originated in Hull, and still have large factories there. When & Colman merged with the Dutch Benckiser in 1999, much production was moved from Hull to Swindon. Heron Frozen Foods is based there near St Andrews Quay, and plc are a food-processing company based in the north of Hull. Aunt Bessies is a large food company in the west of Hull near the A63 and Hessle. Nearby Dentressangle claim to run the largest pea processing factory in the world(Worlds largest pea processing factory) at the junction of the A1166 and the Clive Sullivan Way (A63), which now supplies all of Eyes peas. Standard, the plumbing company, now in north Hull next to the Coast Line, was formed in Hull in 1936. Heating, owned by Stelrad and based nearby, make domestic boilers, and have diversified into source heat pumps and solar thermal water heaters. Comet, who originated there, have some main offices on George Street. Group (former Kingston Communications) is an iconic telecommunications company based next to City Hall. Seven Seas, owned by KGaA, make liver oil and multivitamins is on the A1033 in Marfleet. plc is in Hessle and Systems Military Air Solutions (former Aircraft) make the Hawk at Brough. Industries makes glass in Goole.thumb|130px|left|Theakston Visitor Centre in MashamThere are many RAF bases in Yorkshire, close to the A1, Garrison is the largest army base in Europe near Richmond, and the Defence School of Transport Leconfield is near Beverley. Fylingdales is an important, though secret, part of NATOs Missile Early Warning System. Nestl in the UK are based in York, with operations in Halifax, as is plc (the UKs largest builder of houses), Building Group (who ownPortakabin) and East Coast (former Express East Coast before November 2009). Terrys chocolate was closed in September 2005 by its new owner Foods, and production moved to Poland. The Canadian McCain Ltd has been in Scarborough in 1969; AlphaGraphics UK and the coach builder Plaxton are based there. Seafoods Ltd is in Whitby. Building Society is in Skipton. Dalepak is based in Bar which is owned by Beef Processors. Smiths Brewery is at Tadcaster, owned by Heineken UK, which started brewing Brown Ale in May 2010,() and Smith Brewery. At Masham, there is the Brewery and the Sheep Brewery. NatWest Streamline, the UKs main account provider, is in Harrogate. Silver Cross, the iconic pram manufacturer named after Silver Cross Street in Leeds, is headquartered in Broughton at the junction of the A59 and A56 west of Skipton, although its Heritage prams are made in Bingley (most are made overseas). Quorn is made in Stokesley by Marlow Foods. Aviation make gliders and planes in Kirkbymoorside, on the A170.West and SouthFile:ASDA house.jpg|thumb|140px|right|Asdas Headquarters, Asda House in LeedsLeeds is now a centre of financial services companies,()() with Line() and Direct() based there, as well as Asda,() Foods,() Foods UK (maker of Lurpak and Anchor butter) in Stourton near the A639 junction 44 of the M1 (formerly in Kirkstall near Yorkshire Television). The Flag roadside recovery firm has its main call centre (in Farsley). HSBC opened their first UK call centre in the city, taking advantage of its advanced communications network which also led to the founding of Freeserve in Leeds. The Department of Health has a large administration operation at House, a local landmark. The Waddingtons board game company was founded in Leeds, as was the Burton tailoring company (the Burton Group became the Group) and M & S. The Brewery closed in 2011 and moved operations to Northampton (Carlsberg). Optare make buses in Gates. Oetker products are made at Colton near the M1 junction and Sherburn-in-Elmet. Aramark UK is in Park, Leeds. Unilever have their aerosol division at Whinmoor, in north-east Leeds, administrated by Lever Faberg. It claims to be the largest aerosol factory in the world, and has their research centre, and makes Impulse, Lynx, Dove and Sure. Vehicle Control Systems UK (air brakes) is in Morley. Symingtons make breakfast cereals on the Thornes Business Park, near the A63. The Library is sited at Arch near Wetherby, home of Goldenfry. Clariant UK, the chemical company, is in Yeadon, with a factory in Horsforth. Group, makers of Covent Garden Food Company soups (made on the Europarc in Grimsby), are on the Acorn Business Park, off the A64, next to the Asda at Killingbeck. Leeds is the second largest manufacturing city in the UK, after London. Morrisons is based in Bradford, as are 18-30, Financial, Hallmark Cards UK, Potato Crisps, UK, Building Society, Stylo, the Grattan() catalogue retailer, and Water. Abbey (soon to be Santander) has its savings division there. The Halifax bank (former Building Society) is based in Halifax, the Bank and Building Society in Leeds, and the & Bingley in Bingley. The area between Leeds, Bradford and Wakefield is known as the Triangle.thumb|left|Haribo factory in PontefractSpecialty Chemicals (former Allied Colloids) is in Low Moor. plc in Saltaire is the global market leader in boxs. Denso Marston Ltd make car radiators in Shipley. Roadstuds Ltd, where cats eyes were invented by Shaw, are in Boothtown, in the north of Halifax. plc, south of Hipperholme on the A644 towards Brighouse, is Europes largest independent dryer manufacturer, under the Knight brand. Biscuits (part of Northern Foods) and Cattles are in Batley. Poundstretcher is in Deighton east of Huddersfield, and on Leeds Road (A62) Syngenta have a large factory (former ICI then AstraZeneca) manufacturing herbicides. Brown Ltd. is in Lockwood in Huddersfield; this company owned Martin from 194772 and is the company is now part of Textron. Cummins Turbo Technologies (former Holset), Crompton (motors) and Group are also in Huddersfield. & Welch (owned by Chemicals) were in Castleford and closed in 2005. Netto UK (now owned by Asda) is in Elmsall. Nestle make Crisp and Eight in Castleford (until 2011) and Haribo makes liquorice and cakes in Pontefract. Ardagh Glass UK is at Knottingley, with sites at Bretton and Wheatley (Doncaster). Coca-Cola UK claim to have the largest soft drinks factory in the world at its 41 acre site, with 71,000 sq metres of buildings, at Outwood, which was built in 1989, and produces 6,000 cans (over 100 cans a second, on three canning lines) and 3,300 bottles a minute (seven PET bottling lines, the fastest 2 litre bottling plant in the world), producing 100 million cases of soft drinks a year. To keep up with supply, Rexam have a can factory next door. Nearby is the headquarters of Factory.File:Sweets Galore in Sheffield - geograph.org.uk - 725375.jpg|thumb|right|Cadbury Trebor Bassett at the former Bassetts factory in Owlerton Sheffield is known for its steel industry, which has declined in recent years. Chef are based there, in Carbrook near the Valley Stadium. plc (Europes largest insulation distributor) and Stanley Tools UK are at the city airport. UK (formerly Bassetts) make allsorts in the north of Sheffield on the A61 next-door to Stadium; it is Cadburys Gum & Liquorice division. Plusnet (owned by BT), learndirect (owned by Ltd) and Plus are in the city centre. & Jackson, the tool company, are in the north of Sheffield. Ronseal is based in Chapeltown in Sheffield. Rosebys were in Rotherham, before 2008, and KP make their nuts in Eastwood, to the north of the town. Steel Europe (former Corus) Steel Narrow Strip is in Templeborough and Brinsworth,() with the main plant at Aldwarke. LuK UK (owned by the Group) make clutches at Wales, south of Aston near the M1 junction 31 with the A57. Fresh-Pak Chilled Foods, off the A633 at Waterside Park, Wombwell, make most of the egg mayonnaise (250 tonnes a week) found in British sandwiches and for fillers.(Fresh Pak) Richards and Radio are based between Swinton and Mexborough. Electronics is based on the former site of Main Colliery in Wath-upon-Dearne, off the A6023, with the call centre of Orange broadband next door. The Commission for Employment and Skills is nearby, next to Valley College. Stelrad in Swinton Bridge is the UKs largest producer of domestic radiators, producing 2.5 million a year, and Europes leading radiator company, based off the A6022.Kipling is based at Carlton just north of Barnsley, and makes cakes there. Publishing are in Barnsley. International and Koyo Bearings are at Dodworth near Barnsley. DFS is at le Street near the A1/A638 junction. Lighting have their main factory in Wheatley Park on the A630 in north-east Doncaster. Wabtec Rail make air brakes near railway station. Schenker Rail (UK) (former EWS) is on the A6182 in the south of Doncaster. Montracon (vehicle trailers) are headquartered in Balby Carr, with a manufacturing site at Weighton. Polypipe (uPVC pipes) is in Edlington.SportFootballThe region is home to numerous League and League clubs. Leeds United, Sheffield Wednesday and Huddersfield Town are the most successful clubs in the region in terms of trophies won, each winning 9, 9 and 5 major trophies respectively. Leeds United are the most successful club in terms of European appearances and success, they have also been the UEFA coefficient Top Club on 3 occasions, more than any other English club.Here is a list of the Football League clubs in the region ranked in their final league position in the 201011 season.# Leeds United (7th in Championship())# Hull City (11th in Championship()# Barnsley (17th in the Championship()# Doncaster Rovers (21st in the Championship()# Sheffield United (23rd in the Championship(  relegated to League One)# Scunthorpe United (24th in the Championship(  relegated to League One)# Huddersfield Town (3rd in League One()  qualified for play-offs)# Sheffield Wednesday (15th in League One()# Rotherham United (9th in League Two())# Bradford City (18th in League Two()Rugby LeagueThe area, similar to north Cheshire and parts of Greater Manchester (along the M62), is synonymous with league. Gration, the local veteran BBC presenter, presents the BBC rugby league programme League Show. Local teams are:* Bulldogs* Bulls* Tigers* Rams* RLFC* Rovers* RLFC* Giants* F.C.* Kingston Rovers* Cougars* Rhinos* Eagles* Trinity Wildcats* City KnightsEducationThere are 15 Education Authorities in the Yorkshire and Humber region.() The schools in each authority are listed in the following -File:South Hunsley School Melton 1.jpg|thumb|right|Hunsley School * of schools in Barnsley* of schools in Bradford* of schools in Calderdale* of schools in Doncaster* of schools in the East Riding of Yorkshire* of schools in Hull* of schools in Kirklees* of schools in Leeds* of schools in North East Lincolnshire* of schools in North Lincolnshire* of schools in North Yorkshire* of schools in Rotherham* of schools in Sheffield* of schools in Wakefield* of schools in YorkSecondary educationSchools are mostly comprehensive, with some grammar schools in North Yorkshire, Calderdale and Kirklees.()There are around 235,000 at the regions secondary schools, the 4th lowest for English regions. The region has the highest overall truancy rate in England for both urban and rural areas. Inside the region for districts, Leeds has the highest rate with 6.9% persistent truants at secondary school, then Hull is second with 6.3%. Calderdale has the lowest truancy rate for unitary authorities, almost half that of Leeds, followed by Lincolnshire. For districts Craven has the lowest rate.The schools in Hull have often performed among the worst (on average) in England at GCSE() after Knowsley in Merseyside. To Hulls credit, three schools in its LEA get above-average GCSE results whereas Knowsley usually has none (it managed two in 2010). Also at GCSE, schools in Barnsley and Bradford have low-achieving results with Barnsley the worst of these, and the lowest in the region in 2010. All three of these areas coincidentally have an above-average teenage pregnancy problem. In past years, Doncaster would be included in this group, but has managed to perform much better. For the metropolitan areas, Calderdale and Wakefield consistently perform the best, with both above the England average. Rotherham usually has the best results in South Yorkshire, but in 2010 it was Doncaster. York and North Yorkshire consistently perform the best at GCSE in the region, and with the East Riding of Yorkshire have results above the UK average.Schoolchildren in Kingston upon Hull are most likely not to pass any GCSEs - over 6% with Bradford having a similar proportion, closely followed by Sheffield and North East Lincolnshire. The East Riding of Yorkshire and North Lincolnshire have the fewest not passing any GCSEs, followed by York.For OFSTED inspections across England, the region has the highest proportion of schools (2.7%) with bad behaviour and the lowest proportion (16.3%) of schools with good behaviour. West England has the best behaving schoolchildren. Inside the region, Hull has the highest proportion (16.7%) of schools with bad behaviour - the worst in England (Wandsworth and Bristol come joint second) - and York schools have the highest proportion (30%) of schools with outstanding behaviour. At A-level North Lincolnshire, Kirklees, Hull, York and North Yorkshire perform quite well with Kirklees consistently being the best by a large margin and one of the highest in England, all having results above the England average. Wakefield and Calderdale were also close to the England average. The excellent Kirklees result is due to Greenhead College in Huddersfield, and North Lincolnshires results are due to the Leggott College, also a form college. The districts of South Yorkshire perform the least in the area at A-level with Rotherham having the best results in this area, slightly below-average, and the other three districts achieve similar results, much lower than those in the former districts of Humberside. Leeds and Bradford now get the lowest results in West Yorkshire.For both A-level and GCSE, Barnsley and Bradford are very low performing, with Barnsley usually getting the lowest A-level results in the region, but in 2010 North East Lincolnshire came bottom with unusually low results. Hull and northern Lincolnshire have a wide socio-economic diversity &ndash; many under-achieving pupils at 16 but with high performers at A-level. Hull, although much worse at GCSE, outperforms the East Riding of Yorkshire at A-level.()School children in North Yorkshire (with York and Kirklees) are the most likely to go to university - they also get the best A level results, and those in the East Riding of Yorkshire are likely to go to university, but get lower overall A level results.Top twenty five state schools in Yorkshire and the Humber (2010 A-level results)Edward VII School copy.jpg|thumb|right|King Edward VII School in Sheffield* 1. Grammar School, Skipton (1142)* 2. Crossley Heath School, Halifax* 3. Grammar School* 4. Girls High School* 5. Grammar School* 6. College, Huddersfield* 7. School* 8. School, York* 9. St Marys Catholic Comprehensive School, Menston* 10. McAuley Catholic High School, Doncaster* 11. Grammar School* 12. Dame High School, Sheffield* 13. Grammar School* 14. Grammar School* 15. City Academy, Bradford* 16. Park School, Rawdon* 17. Vale of Ancholme Technology & Music College, Brigg* 18. Grammar School* 19. St Wilfrids Catholic High School and Sixth Form College, Featherstone* 20. College, Pontefract* 21. Shelley College - A Specialist Centre for Science* 22. Saints Catholic High School, Sheffield* 23. Aidans & St. John Fisher Associated Sixth Form, Harrogate* 24. Roundhay School Technology & Language College* 25. Grammar School (860)()CollegesThere are twenty seven FE colleges. The main four colleges are Bradford College, Grimsby Institute, Doncaster College and Hull College.File:Leeds University.jpg|thumb|140px|right|of Leeds Building (1951), named after the electrical engineer Parkinson Universities File:Arts tower.jpg|thumb|140px|left|The University of Sheffields Tower (1966) is the tallest university building in the UK at 255ft, although Imperial Colleges decorative Queens Tower is 287ft and the of Birminghams clock tower is around 330ftThere are nine universities and three higher education colleges in Yorkshire and the Humber, along with (in 2007) 27 Further Education colleges teaching some Higher Education courses.()  The Krebs Cycle was discovered at the of Sheffield in 1937. crystal displays were developed by the of Hull in 1972, in conjunction with the Radar Establishment in Worcestershire. Low fat spreads were developed at the of Leeds (in conjunction with Unilever) in the 1980s, and in the 1930s Astburys x-ray diffraction experiments at the university started the road to the discovery of the double helix structure.The University of Leeds is the largest in the region with 33,000 students, and has the most funding, especially for research. The University of Sheffield is not too far behind, with similar amounts spent on research. The University of York, a large campus similar to a university, gets much less funding than Leeds and Sheffield, but has quite a high research grant for its size, about half that of Leeds or Sheffield. The other universities do not have large research grants. Leeds and Sheffield have around twice as much total income than any other university. York and Bradford are the two smallest universities.For first degree students at universities in the region, 27% are native to the region, 16% are from West England and 11% from the Midlands; 48% are from Northern England and around 25% from Southern England. Access to the M62 determines the regions from which the regions universities students originate from - the nearer there are to the motorway the easier it is to study in the Yorkshire and Humberside region. For first degree students native to the region, 43% stay in the region, 16% go to the North West, 11% to the North East and 11% to the Midlands; just under 10% go to England, with 70% staying in England. Once graduated, 53% of the regions universities graduates (native and non-native) stay to find work in the region, with around 10% moving to the North West (Manchester); 70% stay in Northern England, with 20% going to Southern England.Local media* Local BBC Television comes from BBC Look North in Leeds and BBC Look North in Hull. ITV1 Yorkshire is on Kirkstall Road to the west of Leeds city centre, which broadcasts Calendar and some national programming. Digital switchover takes place in late August for most of the region, with Emley Moor (the main TV transmitter for West and South Yorkshire) converting to digital in mid-September 2011. Emley Moor is the tallest free-standing structure in the UK, and the 25th tallest in the world, and was designed by Arup. The original tower famously collapsed in March 1969. Bilsdale, the regions other main TV transmitter which covers North Yorkshire and transmits North East and Cumbria and Tees Television, will change in 2012.* BBC Radios Humberside, Leeds, Sheffield and York.* Local commercial stations include FM (Barnsley), Pulse of West Yorkshire (Bradford), FM (Doncaster), FM (Grimsby), Stray FM (Harrogate), 107.9 (Huddersfield), Viking FM (Hull), FM, Radio Aire (Leeds), Coast Radio (Scarborough), FM (Sheffield), Radio (Skipton), Real Radio (Tingley), FM (Wakefield), Capital FM Yorkshire (former Galaxy Yorkshire) and FM (York).* National radio is broadcast from Belmont in the south-east, Bilsdale for North Yorkshire, and Moss for South and West Yorkshire. Moorside Edge east of Scammonden Water near the M62 is a main 5 Live transmitter on 909MW.* Local newspapers are the Telegraph and Argus, Courier, Telegraph, Examiner, Daily Mail, Evening News, Telegraph, Star, Press (York), Express, Evening Post and Post.()()* Yorkshire and Humberside are very supportive in their approach to theatre and performance festivals and hold regional championships for young performers every 2 years. The championship is sectioned in Dance, Music and Speech & Drama. The most recent championship was held on Saturday 8 September, at St Margarets Church Hall, Horsforth in Leeds. 16 year-old Nuthana Prathivadi, of Halifax, took the Dance Champion title; Helen Wilson, of Harrogate, titled Music Champion and with 17-year old Lee Peart, of Cleethorpes, winning the Speech & Drama championship.()ReferencesExternal linksFile:Harry Ramsdens at White Cross - geograph.org.uk - 32382.jpg|thumb|right|Ramsdens in Guiseley * Government Office for Yorkshire and the Humber* Local Government Yorkshire and Humber* Yorkshire Forward* Yorkshire and Humber Faiths Forum* Yorkshireeurope - Yorkshire and Humber working in Europe* Yorkshire and Humber Assembly Information Pack* The Northern Way * Yorkshire Chemical Focusy Humbery Humberhag an Humber a HumberEfrog ar Humberand the Humberand the Humbery Humberand the Humbereta Humber fr:Yorkshire-et-HumberEabhraic agus an Humberko:dan Humberog Humbere Humberna Humberun Hamberaand the Humberand the Humberja:og Humberog Humberand the Humbere Humber and the Humberand the Humberja Humberoch Humberth:ve Humberzh:-
53464
Cinnabar
 references   (Mineral Handbook)(Mindat)(Webmineral)Cinnabar (pronounced )  or cinnabarite () (red mercury(II) sulfide (HgS), native vermilion), is the common ore of mercury. Word originThe name comes from  (kinnabari), a Greek word most likely applied by Theophrastus to several distinct substances. Other sources say the word comes from the Persian  shangarf ( zinjifrah), a word of uncertain origin (also  compare, Sanskrit: sugara). In Latin it was sometimes known as minium, meaning also red lead, though both of these terms now refer specifically to tetroxide.StructureHgS adopts two structures, i.e. it is dimorphous.(Wells, A.F. (1984). Structural Inorganic Chemistry, Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-855370-6.) The more stable form is cinnabar, which has a structure akin to that for HgO: each Hg center has two short Hg-S bonds (2.36 ), and four longer Hg---S contacts (3.10, 3.10, 3.30, 3.30 ). The black form of HgS has the zincblende structure.PropertiesCinnabar is generally found in a massive, granular or earthy form and is bright scarlet to brick-red in color.() It occasionally occurs in crystals with a non-metallic adamantine luster. Cinnabar has a rhombohedral lattice, and belongs to the crystal system, trigonal division. Its crystals grow usually in a massive habit, though they are sometimes twinned. The twinning in cinnabar is distinctive and forms a penetration twin that is ridged with six ridges surrounding the point of a pyramid. It could be thought of as two scalahedral crystals grown together with one crystal going the opposite way of the other crystal. The hardness of cinnabar is 22.5, and its gravity 8.1.Cinnabar resembles quartz in its symmetry and certain of its optical characteristics. Like quartz, it exhibits birefringence. It has the highest refractive power of any mineral. Its mean index for sodium light is 3.08,() whereas the index for diamond is 2.42 and that for gallium (III) arsenide (GaAs) is 3.93. OccurrenceGenerally cinnabar occurs as a vein-filling mineral associated with recent volcanic activity and alkaline springs. Cinnabar is deposited by epithermal ascending aqueous solutions (those near surface and not too hot) far removed from their igneous source. It is associated with native mercury, stibnite, realgar, pyrite, marcasite, opal, quartz, chalcedony, dolomite, calcite and barite.(Cinnabar is found in all localities that yield mercury, notably Princesa (Philippines); Almadn (Spain); Almaden (California); Mine and Johns Mine, California;(C.Michael Hogan, Marc Papineau et al., Assessment of the columbus Parkway Widening between Ascot Parkway and the Northgate Development, Vallejo, Earth Metrics Inc. Report 7853, California State Clearinghouse, Sept, 1989) Idrija (Slovenia); New Idria (California); Giza, Egypt; Landsberg, near Obermoschel in the Palatinate; Ripa, at the foot of the Alps and in the Amiata (Tuscany); the mountain Avala (Serbia); Huancavelica (Peru); Arkansas; Terlingua (Texas); and the province of Guizhou in China, where fine crystals have been obtained. It was also mined near Devil, Alaska on the middle River. Red Devil was named after the Red Devil cinnabar mine, a primary source of mercury.Cinnabar is still being deposited at the present day from the hot waters of Bank Mine in California and Springs, Nevada.Mining and extraction of mercuryCinnabar has been mined since the Age (Martn-Gil et al.). During the Empire it was mined both as a pigment (Vitruvius, DA VII; IV-V) (Pliny, HN; XXXIII, XXXVI-XLII) and for its mercury content (Pliny HN; XXXIII, XLI), and it has been the main source of mercury throughout the centuries. To produce liquid (quicksilver) mercury, crushed cinnabar ore is roasted in rotary furnaces. Pure mercury separates from sulfur in this process and easily evaporates. A condensing column is used to collect the liquid metal, which is most often shipped in iron flasks.ToxicityBecause of the mercury content in cinnabar it can be toxic to human beings. Though ancient peoples in South America often used cinnabar for art, or processed it into refined mercury (as a means to gild silver and gold to objects) the toxic properties of mercury were well known. It was dangerous to those who mined and processed cinnabar, it caused shaking, loss of sense, and death...data suggest that mercury was retorted from cinnabar and the workers were exposed to the toxic mercury fumes.() Overexposure to mercury, mercurialism, was seen as an occupational disease to the ancient Romans, Mining in the Spanish cinnabar mines of Almaden, 225 km southwest of Madrid, was regarded as being akin to a death sentence due to the shortened life expectancy of the miners, who were slaves or convicts.()Cinnabar turned into a fine powder is often referred to as vermilion which can be used as a food coloring in extremely small amounts. Animal testing has shown vermilion proved fatal to animals in the proportion of from thirty to seventy grains, even when applied externally to a wound.()Decorative useCinnabar has been used for its color in the new world since the Olmec culture.(New Worlds Oldest, in Time Magazine, Monday, Jul. 29, 1957) Cinnabar was often used in royal burial chambers during the peak of Mayan civilization.(Cinnabar-covered ruin.) The most popularly known use of cinnabar is in Chinese carved lacquerware, a technique that apparently originated in the Dynasty. The danger of mercury poisoning may be reduced in ancient lacquerware by entraining the powdered pigment in lacquer,(http://www.cst.cmich.edu/users/dietr1rv/cinnabar.htm R. V. Dietrich, 2005) but could still pose an hazard if the pieces were accidentally destroyed. In the modern jewelry industry, the toxic pigment is replaced by a resin-based polymer that approximates the appearance of pigmented lacquer.Other forms of cinnabar*Hepatic cinnabar is an impure variety from the mines of Idrija in the Carniola region of Slovenia, in which the cinnabar is mixed with bituminous and earthy matter.*Metacinnabarite is a black-colored form of HgS, which crystallizes in the cubic form.*Synthetic cinnabar is produced by treatment of Hg(II) salts with sulfide to precipitate black, synthetic metacinnabarite, which is then heated in water. This conversion is promoted by the presence of sulfide.(Holleman, A. F.; Wiberg, E. Inorganic Chemistry Academic Press: San Diego, 2001. ISBN 0-12-352651-5.)*Hypercinnabar, crystallise in the hexagonal form. See also * red* of minerals* of mineralsReferences Other references*Martn-Gil, J; Martn-Gil, FJ; Delibes-de-Castro, G; Zapatero-Magdaleno, P; Sarabia-Herrero, FJ (1995). The first use of vermillion. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, 51(8):759-761External links*MSDS for cinnabar*Dartmouth Toxic Metals Research Program  Mercury*Cinnabar visual referencebs:Cinabaritbg:ca:Cinabrics:Cinabaritda:Cinnoberde:Cinnabaritet:Kinaverel:es:Cinabrioeu:Zinabriofa:fr:Cinabregl:Cinabrioio:Cinabroit:Cinabrohe:lv:Cinobrs(mineralas)hu:Cinnabaritnl:Cinnaberja:(mineral)nds:Cinnabarit(minera)pt:Cinbrioro:Cinabruru:simple:Cinnabarsk:Cinabaritsl:Cinabaritsr:sh:Cinabaritfi:Sinooperisv:Cinnobertr:Zincifreuk:sayo:Cinnabarzh:
54582
Amung_people
The Amungme are a group of about 13,000 people living in the highlands of the Papua province of Indonesia. Their language is called Damal. They practice agriculture, supplementing their livelihood by hunting and gathering. The Amungme are very tied to their land and consider the surrounding mountains to be sacred. This has led to friction with the Indonesian government, which is eager to exploit the vast mineral deposits contained there. Major changes in the Amungme lifestyle have been brought about by the mine, situated in the heart of Amungme territory and owned by Freeport-McMoRan, the regions largest single employer. Extensive gold and copper mining have altered the landscape, and the presence of the mine and its infrastructure has attracted numerous other economic migrants from western Indonesia as well as other Papuans, some of whom have tried to settle on traditional Amungme lands. All these factors have created in complex social and political stresses, and led to somewhat frequent protests and/or social conflicts, some of which have been violently suppressed by the Indonesian police or military.fr:AmungmeAmungmems:Amungme
55312
United_Federation_of_Planets
The United Federation of Planets, also known as The Federation is a fictional interplanetary federal republic depicted in the Trek television series and motion pictures.  In those episodes and films, the Federation is described as an interstellar federal polity with, as of the year 2373, more than 150 member planets and thousands of colonies spread across 8,000 light years of the Way Galaxy, and taking the form of a post-capitalist democracy and constitutional republic.(Trek: First Contact) It has also been described as a utopian socialist society. The Federation is described as stressing, at least nominally, the values of universal liberty, equality, justice, peace, and cooperation.(Picards statement to the Borg Collective immediately after being captured in the 1990 third season finale of Trek: The Next Generation, The Best Of Both Worlds, Part I, indicated freedom and self-determination as central tenets of the Federation. The 1991 fourth season NextGen episode Drumhead established the Federation Constitutions Seventh Guarantee, a principle similar to the States Constitutions Fifth Amendment, that protects citizens against self-incrimination. The 1994 second season Deep Space Nine episode The Maquis, Part I established the Federation Code of Justice, which insures that defendants are innocent until proven guilty, and that if innocent, will be set free.  The 1996 fourth season Deep Space Nine episode Accession indicated that the Federation refused membership to planets that practiced systems. The 1996 second season Trek: Voyager episode Meld establishes Directive 101, allowing an individual accused of a crime to remain silent, much like the States Miranda law. All of this is corroborated in Michael and Okudas Trek Encyclopedia, Second Edition; 1997.) The Federation also maintains its own military and exploratory agency, known as Starfleet (also written as Star Fleet in some texts).The legislature of the Federation Council is located at the of San Francisco.(This is established in Trek IV: The Voyage Home and corroborated in the Trek: Enterprise installment In a Mirror, Darkly, Part II.) Several other bodies of the Federation have been depicted. There is an executive branch headed by a Federation President,(Trek IV: The Voyage Home) who keeps offices in the Palais de la Concorde in Paris. There is a judiciary branch as well, the highest court of which is the Federation Supreme Court.(This is referred to in Bashir, I Presume? in Trek: Deep Space Nine.)  The Federations scientific, diplomatic and defensive/military arm is Starfleet, depicted as being headquartered at Baker, just north of Francisco across the Gate Bridge. The Federation comes into military conflict with other major powers in the galaxy such as the Klingon Empire, the Romulan Star Empire, the Cardassian Union, the Borg, and the Dominion.The United Federation of Planets has existed as part of the Star Trek universe since the first season of the original series, and is the primary focus of all the Star Trek series, with the exception of Trek: Enterprise, which is set before the Federation comes into existence.ConceptionThe first mention of the United Federation of Planets was in the 1967 episode Taste of Armageddon, although other vague references such as just The Federation or to the United Earth Space Probe Agency were used in prior episodes. As part of the anti-war message he wanted the show to convey, Star Trek creator Roddenberry intended to depict the Federation as if it was like an ideal, optimistic version of the Nations.(http://woodygoulart.com/wg/trekology/star-trek/gene-roddenberry/) In several following episodes of the original series that were intended as allegories to the then-current War tensions, the Federation took on the role resembling the States while the Klingons represented the Union.() Depiction In the series Trek: Enterprise, Earth Minister Nathan Samuels advocated the Coalition of Planets and invited other alien species, initially the Vulcans, Andorians and Tellarites, to become a part of this. The formation of the Coalition seems to have been the event that provoked the xenophobic Terra Prime incident in the episodes Demons and Terra Prime. After Terra Prime leader Frederick Paxton exploited the xenophobia on Earth, many of the aliens were unnerved and nearly abandoned the idea of a coalition. However, they were convinced by a speech from Captain Archer to give the idea of a united organization of worlds a chance. Six years later in 2161,(The Outcast) the United Federation of Planets was organized.The Federation is founded under a document known as the Charter of the United Federation of Planets October 9, 2161, which is occasionally referred to informally as the Constitution. It draws text and inspiration from the Nations Charter and other sources.  An important guiding principle  indeed, it is listed as General Order One in the list of Starfleet general orders  is the Directive, which forbids any interference in the natural development of any pre-warp civilization.  This is intended to prevent even well-intentioned Federation personnel from introducing changes which could destabilize or even destroy other pre-warp-era cultures through interference.(The Circle (Deep Space Nine))  In practice, however, consistent application of the Prime Directive tends to be a controversial issue, and the Federation does not always abide strictly by it, such as when it attempted to strongarm the Organians into forming an alliance with it,(of Mercy (TOS)) or when it initially approved the forced relocation of the Baku from their adopted homeworldalthough it was eventually determined that the Baku were not a pre-warp civilization.(Trek: Insurrection)  Other aspects of the Articles provide for rule of law, equality among individuals and protection of civil and creative liberties, which appears to be based on principles found in contemporary Western political theory. It includes a set of guarantees of civil rights, the Seventh Guarantee being analogous to the Amendment to the United States Constitution and its protection against self-incrimination.The Federation also has its own black ops agency, referred to only as 31. It can be considered analogous to the modern-day CIA, or to the Romulan Star Empires Tal Shiar and the Cardassians Obsidian Order.The Federation has exacting requirements for prospective member worlds that wish to join. Caste-based discrimination is forbidden,((Star Trek: Deep Space Nine)) and major systematic violations of sentient rights, such as the unjust peacetime imprisonment of specially modified soldiers on the planet Angosia, are not tolerated for any petitioner.(Hunted (Star Trek: The Next Generation)) Furthermore, while most member worlds have single, unified governments, it is not required for entry, as the Federation will consider associate membership of non-unified worlds.(Attached (The Next Generation))Non-canonIn many non-canon sources like Star Trek Star Fleet Technical Manual and Worlds of the Federation, as well as the FASA and Last Unicorn Games Star Trek games, the five founding worlds of the United Federation of Planets were Earth, Vulcan, Tellar, Andoria, and Centauri. Alpha Centauri being a founding world of the Federation and even having a humanlike native race called Centaurans became a popular fan theory, possibly based on uncertainty as to whether or not Cochrane (described in Metamorphosis as Zefram Cochrane of Alpha Centauri) was a native of Alpha Centauri or a resident of a human colony in that system; the latter has since been revealed to be the case, Cochrane having spent most of his life on Earth but eventually retiring to spend his final years on Alpha Centauri, prior to his disappearance and presumed death.The once official, but now non-canon Trek Spaceflight Chronology 1980 - 2188 guide states that the UFP was incorporated at the first Babel Interplanetary Conference in the year 2087.Later, in Trek: Enterprise the actual founding of the Federation can be seen in the episodes Zero Hour and These Are the Voyages..., and early negotiations that lead to it in Demons and Terra Prime. Alpha Centauri is not mentioned as part of the founding, which is explicitly said to be between Humans, Vulcans, Andorians, and Tellarites. This leaves open the possibility of the Alpha Centauri colony becoming an independent polity some time between Terra Prime and These Are the Voyages..., and then helping to form the Federation as a separate member. However, Alpha Centauri is only ever mentioned in passing as an Earth colony on screen. In the alternate timeline seen in the DS9 episode Past Tense, where the Federation was never formed, Alpha Centauri is a Romulan colony instead.In the novels A Time to Kill, A Time to Heal, A Time For War, A Time For Peace, Errand of Vengeance: Seeds of Rage, and Articles of the Federation, the Federation Council was shown occupying the floors below the Presidents office in the Palais de la Concorde. This may be seen as contradicting elements of Trek IV: The Voyage Home and Trek: Voyager.In some non-canonical works like The Star Trek Star Fleet Technical Manual and the novel Articles of the Federation, the Federations founding document is called the Articles Of Federation, which has been popular fan tradition. However, in the Star Trek: Voyager episode The Void, the text of the founding document is shown on screen (the preamble is a slightly reworded version of the UN Charter), and it is clearly called the Charter of the United Federation of Planets, canonically establishing that as the name of the founding document. The term charter is also used in Trek: Enterprise and in the DS9 episode Accession, when discussing membership requirements for the Federation. That latter episode seemed to indicate that the timetable for a worlds entry into the Federation is ten years after the request is made, although the Federation was willing to cut that time in half for Bajor in that episode, and has similarly made other exceptions for times of war, as seen in Trek: Insurrection. In the Trek: The Next Generation episode The Drumhead, Captain Picard refers to the founding document in passing as the Constitution, establishing that it is also known by that name. Novels such as Articles of the Federation presume that it is known by all three names.21st centuryAfter the disastrous World War III was fought by multiple forces (deliberately described as factions, not nations) on Earth, scientist Cochrane built Earths first warp-capable vessel, the Phoenix. He launched it 5 April 2063. The warp-testing of this vessel would garner the attention of a Vulcan science ship operating just outside of the System. Vulcans had not previously considered the Solar System of Earth, or Earth itself, worthy of their attention before this time. However, the science ship lands on Earth, and makes first-contact with Zefram Cochrane and the inhabitants of Montana. This contact would be the first time that Earth joins the interstellar community, and begins the road toward the foundation of the United Federation of Planets.22nd-23rd centuriesIn the year 2119, an aging Cochrane opens the Warp 5 Complex on Earth, in the hope of building a vessel that would be the fastest human starship at the time. Eventually this project would yield the Enterprise NX-01, Earths first deep-space exploration vessel.In 2150, a World Government, United Earth, was formed that included virtually all of the old nation states on Earth.Although no single individual is responsible for the foundation of the United Federation of Planets, the exploratory vessel Enterprise NX-01 was a major catalyst. Under the command of Captain Archer, it helped forge an alliance between the formerly belligerent Vulcan, Andorian, and Tellarite states, and forged a spirit of unity and cooperation in the Alpha Quadrant, culminating in a formal union in 2161. It was first preceded by the of Planets, which was mainly opposed by the xenophobic group, Prime. The Federation was formed largely out of the ashes of the War of the late 2150s ending in 2160, when the founding members saw the need for interstellar unity to prevent the horror of further war. Archer was one of the individuals who signed the Federation Charter, after giving a historic speech that was still being studied two centuries later. According to information seen on a viewscreen in a late episode of Trek: Enterprise, Jonathan Archer later became the Federation ambassador to Andoria, a Federation Councillor, and President of the United Federation of Planets from 2184 to 2192.Around 2223, tensions thickened between the UFP and the Klingon Empire. In 2267, the Organian Peace Treaty was signed which ended major engagements, but the two interstellar powers remained in a state of cold war with occasional skirmishes over the next couple of decades. In 2293 the Klingons sued for peace after the destruction of the Klingon moon Praxis, leading eventually to the signing of the Accords (the events depicted in Star Trek VI). This effectively ended the war and ushered in seven decades of relative peace.During the era of the original series, Captain James Kirk once noted (in the episode Metamorphosis) that humanity was on a thousand planets and spreading out; however, this number apparently encompasses Earths many off-Earth colonies and the various alien worlds on which humans can be found (just as non-humans have been depicted as residing on Earth) and should not be taken to mean that the Federation itself had a thousand members at that time. Considering that many of the Federations other members have several interplanetary colonies just as Earth does, the full number of planets which the Federation encompasses may be impossible to determine; it is presumed that colony worlds are directly subsidiary to the planetary governments of their homeworlds (much like individual states/provinces in a nation), but this has never been clearly established.Early 24th centuryIn 2311, the Tomed Incident occurred in which thousands of Federation civilians and Starfleet personnel were killed by Romulan forces. The unrest was ended by the of Algeron, which re-affirmed the Neutral Zone and prohibited Federation development of cloaking technology.In 2344, the Romulan Star Empire launched an assault on the Klingon outpost at Narendra III, but unexpectedly the USS Enterprise-C, under the command of Captain Garrett, came to the Klingons defense. This Enterprise was destroyed in the skirmish, a sacrifice which did great honor to the Klingons, and the burgeoning diplomacy between the two powers soon grew into a formal alliance. (In an alternate timeline, the Enterprise-C did not so assist, leading eventually to a full-scale war.)Exploration and expansion in the 2340s and 2350s brought the Federation into conflict with several minor and major powers including the Talarians, the Sheliak and eventually, the Cardassians. Cardassian War Federation contact with a race called the Cardassians resulted in an extended conflict. One incident in this conflict was the massacre of Federation civilians on Setlik III in 2347. A truce was reached and a Demilitarized Zone was formed in 2370. A number of Federation and Cardassian colonies found themselves situated within the others territory; an agreement was reached for the transfer of those colonies. However, some Federation colonists were opposed to the agreement and formed the Maquis, a rebel movement who resisted the Cardassians (see below). Mid-24th century In 2365, the Federation had first formal contact with the Borg Collective, who threatened the existence of the Federation at the of Wolf 359. Other events of this era include the Klingon Civil War, first contact with the Q, and various time travel incidents.From 2363 to 2371, the USS Enterprise-D served as the Federations flagship.From 2371-2378, the USS Voyager NCC-74656 was lost in the Delta Quadrant after being taken in the Badlands by the Caretakers Array.From 2373 to 2375, the Federation fought in the War. This was by far the largest conflict the Federation had ever been involved in, allying with the Klingons and Romulans against the combined forces of the Dominion, the Cardassians, and Breen. The Federation/Klingon/Romulan alliance was victorious, due in no small part to the Cardassians switching sides in the war after some of its officials realized that the Dominion had bloodlessly conquered them, but with substantial casualties on both sides.In 2379, a Reman Praetor named Shinzon seized control of the Star Empire. The coup was defeated by the crew of the USS Enterprise-E with assistance from dissidents within the Romulan fleet, opening up the possibility of improved UFP/Romulan relations after over two centuries of tension. However, this improved relationship came at a cost, as the death of Shinzon may have created a vacuum. Future Prominent in some timelines is the Cold War, waged on a number of fronts throughout time including the 28th and 31st centuries.By the 29th century, the Federation explores time as it once did with space.((Star Trek: Voyager))Alternate timelineAs depicted in the Star Trek: Countdown comic series, in 2387 the star of the Hobus system went supernova and posed a serious threat to the Romulan Star Empire. Ambassador Spock formulated a plan involving red matter to halt the Hobus supernova; saving billions of lives and preventing the political destabilization of the Alpha and Quadrants. However, they did not act soon enough to save Romulus from being destroyed. A Romulan mining ship called the Narada captained by Nero attacked the Jellyfish (the ship in which Spock traveled) as Nero blames the Federation (Ambassador Spock in particular) for the destruction of his homeworld and for the death of his wife and child. During the attack, both ships are pulled into the singularity and transported into the past; the appearance of the Narada (which arrives farther into the past than the Jellyfish) and its subsequent attack on the USS Kelvin creates an alternate timeline depicted in the 2009 Star Trek film.EconomicsThe Federation has largely been portrayed as an socialist economic utopia. On Earth, war and poverty have been eliminated. Individuals strive for self-betterment rather than fiscal remuneration. This condition probably does not extend to the outer reaches of the Federation or other powers with similar levels of technology, where substances such as latinum are used as currency on a somewhat hoc basis, and for the purpose of trade with other cultures, although there have been persistent references to a credit unit of currency used at least occasionally in the Federation.In the Trek: Voyager episode Frontier, Paris describes it as the New World Economy, which began in the late 22nd century and eventually made money obsolete, as does Picard while explaining the timeline to Sloane in Trek: First Contact.The first mention of the Federation not using money came in Trek IV: The Voyage Home, where Kirk (coming from 2286) says these people still use money upon arriving at 20th-century Earth, and says We dont when asked whether or not he and his crew use money in the 23rd century. In The Neutral Zone, Picard tries to explain to cryogenically preserved people from the late 20th century that 24th century economics are quite different and money as they know it is not used or needed in the Federation. In Trek: First Contact, he gives a similar speech to Lily.However, this appears to be either a retcon, or a change in the Federation that occurred over the course of the 23rd century, as apparently for at least the latter half of the 23rd century, a monetary unit known as the credit was in fairly common use. At the Federation space station K-7 in the original series episode Trouble with Tribbles, set in 2267, Uhura offers to buy a Tribble for 10 credits. In the episode Errand of Mercy, also set in 2267, Spock estimates that Starfleet has invested over 122,200 credits in his training as a Starfleet officer. In Trek III: The Search for Spock, in 2285, while on Earth, McCoy attempts to hire a ship to take him to the Genesis Planet, and is warned it would be expensive and cost many credits; we do not know if McCoy could have afforded this or how much it would cost, since he was taken into custody for breaching the secrecy of the Genesis Project immediately afterwards. And in Trek II: The Wrath of Khan, Carol Marcus mentions the Federations decision whether or not to fund the Genesis Project itself, though fund may mean something different in this context as credits are not mentioned. There are also references to buying and selling that do not specifically mention credits; for example, while entering the meeting room in Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country, Scott states that he had just purchased a boat. During the film Trek Generations, Captain Kirk states that he sold his house some time in the previous nine years, which from Kirks perspective would be between 2284 and roughly 2290. By the time of The Next Generation, money was considered abhorrent to many members of Starfleet, although in Encounter at Farpoint, set in 2364, Crusher buys a bolt of fabric and requests that it be charged to her account on the Enterprise. Two years later, in 2366, in The Price, the Federation is willing to pay millions of credits for access to a stable wormhole. Additionally, some officers were shown in Tapestry to visit casinos, particularly near starbases, and poker is shown on a number of occasions to be a favorite pastime of Enterprise-D crewmembers, though real money is never said to be part of the game. In the Deep Space Nine episode Explorers, Sisko says that when he first entered Academy, he rapidly spent an entire months allotment of transporter credits (which may not be the same thing as 23rd-century credits) on transporting back and forth to his home in Orleans. He also arranges for his wifes employer to give her a months paid vacation (emphasis in episode) in Changing Face of Evil (although his wife works for the Bajorans, a non-Federation race). And in the pilot episode of Trek: Voyager, Paris makes a reference to having someone pay his bar bills.From this evidence, it is clear that money in the form of tender has effectively ceased to exist. See also * Linguacode References  External links Lin-pang  Unida de Planetesfederace planetde Planetas UnidosFederacio de Planedojdes plantes uniesFederacija PlanetaFederation of Planetsdei Pianeti Uniti Federatioun vun de PlanitenEgyeslt FdercijaFederatie van Planetenja:Federacja Planetdos Planetas Unidos (Star Trek)Unit a Planetelor federcia plantFederacija PlanetaFederation of PlanetsGezegenler Federasyonu zh:
55668
Chinese_Exclusion_Act
The Chinese Exclusion Act was a United States federal law signed by A. Arthur on May 8, 1882, following revisions made in 1880 to the Treaty of 1868. Those revisions allowed the U.S. to suspend immigration, and Congress subsequently acted quickly to implement the suspension of Chinese immigration, a ban that was intended to last 10 years. This law was repealed by the Act on December 17, 1943.BackgroundFile:Chinese railroad workers in snow.jpg|thumb|250px|right|Chinese immigrant workers building the railroad.The first significant Chinese immigration to the United States began with the Gold Rush of 1848-1855, and continued with subsequent large labor projects, such as the building of the Transcontinental Railroad. During the early stages of the gold rush, when surface gold was plentiful, the Chinese were tolerated, if not well-received.() As gold became harder to find and competition increased, animosity toward the Chinese and other foreigners increased. After being forcibly driven from the mines, most Chinese settled in enclaves in cities, mainly San Francisco, and took up low end wage labor such as restaurant work and laundry just to earn enough to live. With the post Civil War economy in decline by the 1870s, anti-Chinese animosity became politicized by labor leader Kearney and his Party(See, e.g., http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/5046/%7C) as well as by California Governor Bigler, both of whom blamed Chinese coolies for depressed wage levels. Another significant anti-Chinese group organized in California during this same era was the Order of Caucasians with some 60 chapters statewide.Chinese Gold Rush in CaliforniaEarly on the California government did not wish to exclude Chinese migrant workers from immigration because they provided essential tax revenue which helped fill the fiscal gap of California. Only later, when there was enough money did the government cease to oppose Chinese exclusion. By 1860 the Chinese were the largest immigrant group in California. The Chinese workers provided cheap labor and did not use any of the government infrastructure (schools, hospitals, etc.) because the Chinese migrant population was predominantly made up of healthy male adults.(Kanazawa, Mark. Immigration, Exclusion, and Taxation: Anti-Chinese Legislation Gold Rush in California. The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 65, No. 3 (Sep., 2005), pp. 779-805. Published by: Cambridge University Press on behalf of the Economic History Association.) As time passed and more and more Chinese migrants arrived in California violence would often break out in cities such as Los Angeles. By 1878 Congress decided to act and passed legislation excluding the Chinese, but this was vetoed by President Hayes. California, in its zeal for excluding the Chinese, declared a holiday on March 6, 1881, in order to hold widespread demonstrations to support the anti-Chinese legislation. Once the Chinese Exclusion Act was finally passed in 1882, California went further in its discrimination against the Chinese by passing various laws that were later held to be unconstitutional.(Cole, L. Cheryl.Chinese Exclusion: The Capitalist Perspective of the Sacramento Union, 1850-1882.California History, Vol. 57, No. 1, The Chinese in California (Spring, 1978), pp. 8-31. Published by: California Historical Society) After the act was passed most Chinese families were faced with a dilemma: stay in the United States alone or go back to China to reunite with their families.(Chew, Kenneth and Liu, John. Hidden in Plain Sight: Global Labor Force Exchange in the Chinese American Population, 1880-1940. Population and Development Review, Vol. 30, No. 1 (Mar., 2004), pp. 57-78.Published by: Population Council) Newspapers around the country and especially in California started to discredit and blame the Chinese for most things, e.g., white unemployment. The police also discriminated against the Chinese by using the slightest opportunity to arrest them. Although there was widespread dislike for the Chinese, some capitalists and entrepreneurs resisted their exclusion based on economic factors.(Miller, Joaquin. The Chinese and the Exclusion Act. The North American Review, Vol. 173, No. 541 (Dec., 1901), pp. 782-789. Published by: University of Northern Iowa)The ActThe Chinese Exclusion Act was one of the most significant restrictions on free immigration in U.S. history. The Act excluded Chinese skilled and unskilled laborers and Chinese employed in mining from entering the country for ten years under penalty of imprisonment and deportation. Many Chinese were relentlessly beaten just because of their race. ()(usnews.com: The Peoples Vote: Chinese Exclusion Act (1882)) The few Chinese non-laborers who wished to immigrate had to obtain certification from the Chinese government that they were qualified to immigrate, which tended to be difficult to prove.( Volpp argues that the Chinese Exclusion Act is a misnomer, in that it is assumed to be the starting point of Chinese exclusionary laws in the United States. She suggests attending to the intersections of race, gender, and U.S. citizenship in order to both understand the restraints of such a historical tendency and make visible Chinese female immigration experiences, including the Act of 1875.(Leti Volpp Divesting Citizenship: On Asian American History and the Loss of Citizenship Through Marriage The Regents of the University of California. UCLA Law Review (2005).)The Act also affected Asians who had already settled in the United States. Any Chinese who left the United States had to obtain certifications for reentry, and the Act made Chinese immigrants permanent aliens by excluding them from U.S. citizenship.(( After the Acts passage, Chinese men in the U.S. had little chance of ever reuniting with their wives, or of starting families in their new homes.(Amendments made in 1884 tightened the provisions that allowed previous immigrants to leave and return, and clarified that the law applied to ethnic Chinese regardless of their country of origin. The Act (1888) expanded upon the Chinese Exclusion Act, prohibiting reentry after leaving the U.S. The Act was renewed for ten years by the 1892 Act, and again with no terminal date in 1902.( When the act was extended in 1902, it required each Chinese resident to register and obtain a certificate of residence. Without a certificate, he or she faced deportation.(Between 1882 and 1905, about 10,000 Chinese appealed against negative immigration decisions to federal court, usually via a petition for corpus.(Daniel, Roger, Book Review) In most of these cases, the courts ruled in favor of the petitioner.( Except in cases of bias or negligence, these petitions were barred by an act that passed Congress in 1894 and was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court in U.S. vs Lem Moon Sing (1895). In U.S. vs Ju Toy (1905), the U.S. Supreme Court reaffirmed that the port inspectors and the Secretary of Commerce had final authority on who could be admitted. Ju Toys petition was thus barred despite the fact that the district court found that he was an American citizen. The Supreme Court determined that refusing entry at a port does not require due process and is legally equivalent to refusing entry at a land crossing. This ruling triggered a brief boycott of U.S. goods in China.One of the critics of the Chinese Exclusion Act was the anti-slavery/anti-imperialist Republican Senator Frisbie Hoar of Massachusetts who described the Act as nothing less than the legalization of racial discrimination.(Roger Daniels, Coming to America, p271.)The laws were driven largely by racial concerns; immigration of persons of other races was unlimited during this period.(http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id1121119 Chin, Gabriel J., (1998) of California, Los Angeles|UCLA Law Review vol. 46, at 1 Segregations Last Stronghold: Race Discrimination and the Constitutional Law of Immigration)On the other hand, many people strongly supported the Chinese Exclusion Act, including the of Labor, a labor union, who supported it because it believed that industrialists were using Chinese workers as a wedge to keep wages low.(Kennedy, David M. Cohen, Lizabeth, Bailey, Thomas A. The American Pageant. New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2002) Among labor and leftist organizations, the Workers of the World were the sole exception to this pattern. The IWW openly opposed the Chinese Exclusion Act from its inception in 1905.(Choi, Jennifer Jung Hee. The Rhetoric of Inclusion: The I.W.W. and Asian Workers)Effects and aftermathFor all practical purposes, the Exclusion Act, along with the restrictions that followed it, froze the Chinese community in place in 1882, and prevented it from growing and assimilating into U.S. society as European immigrant groups did.( Limited immigration from China continued until the repeal of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1943. From 1910 to 1940, the Angel Island Immigration Station on what is now Angel Island State Park in Francisco Bay served as the processing center for most of the 56,113 Chinese immigrants who are recorded as immigrating or returning from China; upwards of 30% more who showed up were returned to China. Furthermore, after the San Francisco earthquake, which destroyed City Hall and the Hall of Records, many immigrants (known as paper sons) claimed that they had familial ties to resident Chinese-American citizens. Whether these were true or not cannot be proven.The Chinese Exclusion Act gave rise to the first great wave of commercial human smuggling, an activity that later spread to include other national and ethnic groups.()Later, the Act of 1924 restricted immigration even further, excluding all classes of Chinese immigrants and extending restrictions to other Asian immigrant groups.( Until these restrictions were relaxed in the middle of the twentieth century, Chinese immigrants were forced to live a life apart, and to build a society in which they could survive on their own.(Furthermore, the Chinese Exclusion Act did not address the problems that whites were facing; in fact, the Chinese were quickly and eagerly replaced by the Japanese, who assumed the role of the Chinese in society. Unlike the Chinese, some Japanese were even able to climb the rungs of society by setting up businesses or becoming truck farmers.(Alan Brinkleys American History: A Survey, 12th Edition) However, the Japanese were later targeted in the National Origins Act of 1924, which banned immigration from east Asia entirely.In 1891 the Government of China refused to accept the U.S. senator Mr W. Blair as U.S. Minister to China due to his abusive remarks regarding China during negotation of the Chinese Exclusion Act.(E. Denza, Commentary to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, Third Ed. Oxford University Press 2008, p. 51)Repeal and current statusThe Chinese Exclusion Act was repealed by the 1943 Act, which permitted Chinese nationals already residing in the country to become naturalized citizens and stop hiding from the threat of deportation. It also allowed a national quota of 105 Chinese immigrants per year. Large scale Chinese immigration did not occur until the passage of the Immigration Act of 1965. Despite the fact that the exclusion act was repealed in 1943, the law in California that Chinese people were not allowed to marry whites was not repealed until 1948.(Chin, Gabriel; Karthikeyan, Hrishi (2002). Asian Law Journal vol. 9 Preserving Racial Identity: Population Patterns and the Application of Anti-Miscegenation Statutes to Asian Americans, 1910-1950)(See v. Sharp, 32 Cal. 2d 711 (1948).)Even today, although all its constituent sections have long been repealed, Chapter 7 of Title 8 of the States Code is headed, Exclusion of Chinese.(US CODE-TITLE 8-ALIENS AND NATIONALITY) It is the only chapter of the 15 chapters in Title 8 (Aliens and Nationality) that is completely focused on a specific nationality or ethnic group.See also* Exclusion* American* American history* of United States immigration legislation* States v. Wong Kim Ark, which held that the Chinese Exclusion Act could not overrule the citizenship of those born in the U.S. to Chinese parents* massacre of 1871* Springs massacre* Sinophobia* Peril* Australia policy* Immigration Act, 1923, of Canada* Zealand head tax* tax (Canada)References* Bodenner, Chris. Chinese Exclusion Act. Issues & Controversies in American History @ FACTS.com. 20 Oct. 2006. Facts On File News Services. 3 Nov. 2007 .External links* Chinese Exclusion Act* Chinese Exclusion Act (1882) - Our Documents* Exclusion Act Case Files of Yee Wee Thing and Yee Bing Quai, two Paper Sons* The Yung Wing Project hosts the memoir of one of the earliest naturalized Chinese whose citizenship was revoked forty-six years after having received it as a result of the Chinese Exclusion Act.* An Alleged Wife One Immigrant in the Chinese Exclusion Era* Collection of primary source documents relating to the Chinese Exclusion Act, from Harvard University.* Primary source documents and images from the University of California* The Rocky Road to Liberty: A Documented History of Chinese American Immigration and ExclusionExclusion Actdexclusion des ChinoisExclusion Act  zh:
56313
Zoning
File:GUP Skopje 2002 mal.jpg|thumb|right|300px|On the Zoning Scheme of the General Spatial Plan for the of Skopje, different urban zoning is represented by different color.Zoning is a device of use planning used by local governments in most developed countries.(E.g., Lefcoe, George, The Regulation of Superstores: The Legality of Zoning Ordinances Emerging from the Skirmishes between Wal-Mart and the United Food and Commercial Workers Union (April 2005). USC Law, Legal Studies Research Paper No. 05-12; and USC Law and Economics Research Paper No. 05-12. Available at SSRN or DOI)(and Country Planning Act 1990)(http://www.bmvbs.de/) The word is derived from the practice of designating permitted uses of land based on mapped zones which separate one set of uses from another.  Zoning may be use-based (regulating the uses to which land may be put), or it may regulate building height, lot coverage, and similar characteristics, or some combination of these.  Similar planning methods have dictated the use of various areas for particular purposes in many cities from ancient times.ScopeTheoretically, the primary purpose of zoning is to segregate uses that are thought to be incompatible. In practice, zoning is used to prevent new development from interfering with existing residents or businesses and to preserve the character of a community. Zoning is commonly controlled by local governments such as counties or municipalities, though the nature of the zoning regime may be determined or limited by state or national planning authorities or through enabling legislation.(E.g., Maryland Code Article 66B,  2.01(b) grants zoning powers to the City of Baltimore, while  2.01(c) limits the grant of powers.  By contrast, the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law grants uniform zoning powers (with uniform limitations) to all municipalities in that state.) In Australia, land under the control of the Commonwealth (federal) government is not subject to state planning controls. The States and other federal countries are similar. Zoning and urban planning in France and Germany are regulated by national or federal codes. In the case of Germany this code includes contents of zoning plans as well as the legal procedure. Zoning may include regulation of the kinds of activities which will be acceptable on particular lots (such as open space, residential, agricultural, commercial or industrial), the densities at which those activities can be performed (from low-density housing such as single family homes to high-density such as high-rise apartment buildings), the height of buildings, the amount of space structures may occupy, the location of a building on the lot (setbacks), the proportions of the types of space on a lot, such as how much landscaped space, surface, traffic lanes, and parking must be provided. In Germany, zoning usually includes building design, very specific greenspace and compensation regulations. The details of how individual planning systems incorporate zoning into their regulatory regimes varies though the intention is always similar. For example, in the state of Victoria, Australia, land use zones are combined with a system of planning scheme overlays to account for the multiplicity of factors that impact on desirable urban outcomes in any location.Most zoning systems have a procedure for granting variances (exceptions to the zoning rules), usually because of some perceived hardship caused by the particular nature of the property in question.Basically, urban zones fall into one of five major categories: residential, mixed residential-commercial, commercial, industrial and special (e. g. power plants, sports complexes, airports, shopping malls etc.). Each category can have a number of sub-categories, for example, within the commercial category there may be separate zones for small-retail, large retail, office use, lodging and others, while industrial may be subdivided into heavy manufacturing, light assembly and warehouse uses. In Germany, e. g., each category has a designated limit for noise emissions (not part of the building code, but federal emissions code).In the United States or Canada, for example, residential zones can have the following sub-categories:# Residential occupancies containing sleeping units where the occupants are primarily transient in nature, including:  boarding houses, hotels, motels# Residential occupancies containing sleeping units or more than two dwelling units where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature, including: apartment houses, boarding houses, convents, dormitories.# Residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not classified as Group R-1, R-2, R-4 or I, including: buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units, adult care facilities for five or fewer persons for less than 24 hours.# Residential occupancies shall include buildings arranged for occupancy as residential care/assisted living facilities including more than five but not more than 16 occupants.Conditional zoning allows for increased flexibility and permits municipalities to respond to the unique features of a particular land use application. Uses which might be disallowed under current zoning, such as a school or a community center can be permitted via conditional use zoning.U.S.File:TallaLandUse.jpg|right|thumb|300px|Zoning scheme of the center of Tallahassee, USA.Under the power rights state governments may exercise over private property, special laws and regulations were long made, restricting the places where particular businesses should be carried on.  In 1916, York City adopted the first zoning regulations to apply city-wide as a reaction to The Equitable Building which towered over the neighboring residences, diminishing the availability of sunshine.  These laws set the pattern for zoning in the rest of the country.  New York City went on to develop ever more complex regulations, including floor-area ratio regulations, rights and others for specific neighborhoods.The constitutionality of zoning ordinances was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court in the 1926 case of Euclid, Ohio v. Ambler Realty Co..  Among large populated cities in the United States, Houston is unique in having no zoning ordinances.(Houston Chronicle, 12-10, 2007) Rather, land use is regulated by other means.(Planetizen)Zoning types in the United StatesZoning codes have evolved over the years as urban planning theory has changed, legal constraints have fluctuated, and political priorities have shifted. The various approaches to zoning can be divided into four broad categories: Euclidean, Performance, Incentive, and form-based.Named for the type of zoning code adopted in the town of Ohio, and approved in a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court, of Euclid, Ohio v. Ambler Realty Co.(272 U.S. 365, 71 L.Ed. 303, 47 S.Ct. 114 (1926).) Euclidean zoning codes are the most prevalent in the United States.   Euclidean zoning is characterized by the segregation of land uses into specified geographic districts and dimensional standards stipulating limitations on development activity within each type of district.  Advantages include relative effectiveness, ease of implementation, long-established legal precedent, and familiarity. However, Euclidean zoning has received criticism for its lack of flexibility and institutionalization of now-outdated planning theory.Also known as effects-based planning, performance zoning uses performance-based or goal-oriented criteria to establish review parameters for proposed development projects. Performance zoning is intended to provide flexibility, rationality, transparency and accountability, avoiding the arbitrariness of the Euclidean approach and better accommodating market principles and private property rights with environmental protection.  Difficulties included a requirement for a high level of discretionary activity on the part of the supervising authority.  Performance zoning has not been widely adopted in the USA.First implemented in Chicago and New York City, incentive zoning is intended to provide a reward-based system to encourage development that meets established urban development goals.(http://www.webvest.info/glossary/dictionary_zone.php)  Typically, the method establishes a base level of limitations and a reward scale to entice developers to incorporate the desired development criteria.  Incentive zoning allows a high degree of flexibility, but can be complex to administer.codes offer considerably more flexibility in building uses than do Euclidean codes.  Form-based zoning regulates not the type of land use, but the form that that land use may take. For instance, form-based zoning in a dense area may insist on low setbacks, high density, and pedestrian accessibility.Criticism of zoning lawsMuch criticism of zoning laws comes from those who see the restrictions as a violation of property rights. It has been argued that zoning boards and city councils can too easily strip property owners of their right to unencumbered use of their land. It has also been argued that zoning laws work against economic efficiency and therefore hinder development in a free economy.  A poor zoning restriction could hinder the optimal efficient usage of a given area.  Even without any zoning restrictions, a landfill, for example, would likely gravitate to cheaper land rather than being placed in a residential area.  Also, strict zoning laws can get in the way of creative developments like mixed-use buildings and can even stop harmless activities like yard sales.(http://mises.org/daily/2077)In French zoning by income instead of with mixed occupation is called zonage  lamricaine.(In Search of Lost Paris, Luc Sante, New York Review of Books, December 23, 2010)United KingdomDevelopment control or planning control is the element of the Kingdoms system of town and country planning through which local government regulates use and new building. It relies on the plan-led system whereby plans are formed and the public consulted. Subsequent development requires permission, which will be granted or refused with reference to the development plan as a material consideration.There are 421 Local Planning Authorities (LPAs) in the Kingdom. Generally they are the local borough or district council or a authority. Development involving mining, minerals or waste disposal matters is dealt with by councils in non-metropolitan areas. Within national parks, it is the park authority that determines planning applications.AustraliaThe legal framework for land use zoning in Australia is established by States and Territories, hence each State or Territory has different zoning rules. Land use zones are generally defined at local government level, and most often called Planning Schemes. planning otherwise known as town planning, development control or development management, refers to the part of the planning process that is concerned with the regulation and management of changes to land use and development.(Gleeson B. and Low N., Australian Urban Planning: New Challenges, New Agendas, Allen & Unwin, St Leonards, 2000.)New ZealandZealands planning system is grounded in effects-based Performance Zoning under the Resource Management Act.SingaporeThe framework for governing land uses in Singapore is administered by the Redevelopment Authority (URA) through the Master Plan.(URA Master Plan 2008 website) The Master Plan is a statutory document divided into two sections: the plans and the Written Statement. The plans show the land use zoning allowed across Singapore, while the Written Statement provides a written explanation of the zones available and their allowed uses.See also* centre* theory* zoning* codes* zoning* use development* urbanism* use* permission* power* of Intelligent Urbanism* sensitivity* Road* zoning* planning* (land)* Traffic* (land use)* NIMBYReferencesFurther reading*Bassett, E.M. The master plan, with a discussion of the theory of community land planning legislation. New York: Russell Sage foundation, 1938.*Bassett, E. M. Zoning. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1940External links*Crenex - Zoning Maps - Links to zoning maps and planning commissions of 50 most populous cities in the US.* New York City Department of City Planning - Zoning History* Schindlers Land Use Page (Michigan State University Extension Land Use Team) * Land Policy Institute at Michigan State University * Zoning: A Reply To The Critics da:Lokalplande:Bebauungsplanes:Zonificacinlocal durbanismeko:id:Pemintakatanit:Zonizzazione nl:Bestemmingsplanja:plan zagospodarowania przestrzennegopt:Zoneamentofi:Asemakaavasv:Detaljplan
57013
Economy_of_the_Solomon_Islands
A per capita GDP of $340 ranks Islands as a lesser developed nation. Over 75% of its labour force is engaged in subsistence farming and fishing. Until 1998, when world prices for tropical timber fell steeply, timber was Solomon Islands main export product, and, in recent years, Solomon Islands forests were dangerously overexploited. Other important cash crops and exports include copra and oil. In 1998 Ross Mining of Australia began producing gold at Gold Ridge on Guadalcanal. Minerals exploration in other areas continued. However in the wake of the ethnic violence in June 2000, exports of palm oil and gold ceased while exports of timber fell. Exploitation of Solomon Islands rich fisheries offers the best prospect for further export and domestic economic expansion. However, a Japanese joint venture, Solomon Taiyo Ltd., which operated the only fish cannery in the country, closed in mid-2000 as a result of the ethnic disturbances. Though the plant has reopened under local management, the export of tuna has not resumed. Tourism, particularly diving, is an important service industry for Solomon Islands. Growth in that industry is hampered, however, by lack of infrastructure, transportation limitations and security concerns. Solomon Islands was particularly hard hit by the financial crisis even before the ethnic violence of June 2000. The Development Bank estimates that the crash of the market for tropical timber reduced Solomon Islands GDP by between 15%-25%. About one-half of all jobs in the timber industry were lost. The government has said it will reform timber harvesting policies with the aim of resuming logging on a more sustainable basis. Since 2000 the Government of Solomon Islands has become increasingly insolvent. It has exhausted its borrowing capacity; in 2001 the deficit reached 8% of GDP. It is unable to meet bi-weekly payrolls and has become extraordinarily dependent on funds from foreign aid accounts, which provided an estimated 50% of government expenditure in 2001. Principal aid donors are Australia $247 Million per year (2006), Zealand $14 Million per year (2004), the Union, Japan $40 Million per year (2005), and the of China (Taiwan) At least $20 Million per year . The Solomon Islands are a member of the WTO.Economy - overview:GDP:power parity - $800 million (2002 est.) GDP - growth rate:5.8% (2003 est.)Foreign Government Aid as a % of GDP:40.125% (2006 est.)GDP - per capita:purchasing power parity - $1,700 (2002 est.)  GDP - composition by sector:agriculture:42%industry:11%services:47% (2000 est.)Including receiving Aid as a sector of GDP:agriculture: 25%industry: 6.5%services: 28% (2000 est.)receiving aid from other countries: 40.5%Population below line:NA%Household income or consumption by percentage share:lowest 10%:NA%highest 10%:NA%Inflation rate (consumer prices):10% (1999 est.)Labor force:26,842Labor force - by occupation:agriculture 75%, industry 5%, services 20% (2000 est.)rate:NA%Budget:revenues:$49.7 millionexpenditures:$75.1 million, including capital expenditures of $0 (2003) Industries:fish (tuna), mining, timberIndustrial production growth rate:NA%Agriculture - products:cocoa, beans, coconuts, palm kernels, rice, potatoes, vegetables, fruit; cattle, pigs; timber; fishExports:$142 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)Exports - commodities:timber, fish, oil, cocoa, copraExports - partners:Japan 50%, Spain 16%, Kingdom, Thailand 5% (1996)Imports:$160 million (c.i.f., 1998 est.)Imports - commodities:plant and equipment, manufactured goods, food and live animals, fuelImports - partners:Australia 42%, Japan 10%, Singapore 9%, Zealand 8%, States 5% (1996)Debt - external:$135 million (1997)aid - recipient:$46.4 million (1995)Currency:1 Solomon Islands dollar (SI$)  100 centsExchange rates:Solomon Islands dollars (SI$) per US$1  5.0745 (January 2000), 4.8381 (1999), 4.8156 (1998), 3.5664 (1997), 3.4059 (1995)Fiscal year:calendar year Energy Electricity - production:30 GWh (1998)Electricity - production by source:fossil fuel:100%hydro:0%nuclear:0%other:0% (1998)Electricity - consumption:28 GWh (1998)Electricity - exports:0 kWh (1998)Electricity - imports:0 kWh (1998) Renewable energy A team of renewable energy developers working for the Islands Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) and funded by the Energy and Energy Efficiency Partnership (REEEP), have hatched a scheme that enables these communities to access renewable energy, such as solar, without raising substantial sums of ready cash. If the islanders were not able to pay for solar lanterns with cash, reasoned the project developers, they can pay with crops  (http://www.renewableenergyworld.com/rea/news/article/2009/04/solomon-islands-solar-a-new-microfinance-concept-takes-root?cmpidWNL-Wednesday-April8-2009) References (de les Illes Salomde las Islas Salomndas Illas Salomndi Salomon Insulide las Illas Salamondas Ilhas Salomo
57234
Putnam_County,_Missouri
Putnam County is a county located in the state of Missouri.  As of 2010, the population was 4,979.  The name is in honor of Putnam, who was a hero in the and Indian War and a general in the Revolutionary War.  Its seat and primary city is Unionville.HistoryPutnam County was established on February 28, 1845 from parts of Adair and Sullivan counties. The following year a portion of Putnam was removed for the formation of Dodge County. At this time, and until a U.S. Supreme Court decision in 1851, both Putnam and Dodge extended nearly nine miles further north than present day due to a border dispute between the states of Missouri and Iowa (see War for details). Following the Supreme Court ruling Dodge County was distablished and the land consolidated back into Putnam County.(Missouri State Historical Society marker, 1958) During the first few years of existence the county seat changed many times, often with contentious debate. Putnamville, Bryant Station -- both no longer in existence --  and Hartford all served the purpose until in 1853 a central location first called Harmony later renamed Unionville was chosen.(http://thelibrary.org/lochist/moser/putnampl.html) By the 1860 U.S. Census Putnam County had 9,240 residents along with eighteen sawmills and three flour mills.(The Missouri Handbook by P.M. Pinckard. Published 1865) Coal had been an abundant natural resource since the first white settlers ventured into the area, and following the arrival of the Burlington & Southwestern Railway in 1873, coal mining became a major employer, particularly in the eastern portion of the county. At one time three railroads crossed Putnam county -- the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul; the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy; and the Iowa and St. Louis -- all running north to south.(A History of Northeast Missouri, Vol.1 Chapter 25. Published 1913.) Putnam County lost over two-thirds of its population between the years 1900 and 2000 (see census data below) as America changed from a rural to a more urban society.DemographicsAs of the census of 2010, there were 4,979 people, 2,228 households, and 1,517 families residing in the county.  The density was 10 people per square mile (4/km).  There were 2,914 housing units at an average density of 6 per square mile (2/km).  The racial makeup of the county was 99.14% White, 0.06% Black or African American, 0.10% Native American, 0.13% Asian, 0.10% from other races, and 0.48% from two or more races.  0.61% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 2,228 households out of which 27.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.20% were married couples living together, 7.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.90% were non-families. 28.70% of all households were made up of individuals and 15.90% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.32 and the average family size was 2.83.In the county the population was spread out with 24.00% under the age of 18, 6.20% from 18 to 24, 24.00% from 25 to 44, 25.10% from 45 to 64, and 20.70% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females there were 96.10 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.90 males.The median income for a household in the county was $26,282, and the median income for a family was $32,031. Males had a median income of $22,957 versus $18,884 for females. The capita income for the county was $14,647.  About 13.20% of families and 16.00% of the population were below the line, including 20.60% of those under age 18 and 12.80% of those age 65 or over.* Pre-1900 data from A History of Northeast Missouri, Published 1913GeographyAccording to the 2000 census, the county has a total area of , of which  (or 99.66%) is land and  (or 0.34%) is water.() Cities and towns Adjacent counties*County, Iowa  (northwest)*County, Iowa  (northeast)*Schuyler County  (east)*Adair County  (southeast)*Sullivan County  (south)*Mercer County  (west)Major highways*20px U.S. Route 136*20px Route 5*20px Route 129*20px Route 139*20px Route 149See also*National Register of Historic Places listings in Putnam County, MissouriReferences(External links* Digitized 1930 Plat Book of Putnam County from of Missouri Division of Special Collections, Archives, and Rare Books (, )County (Missouri)de Putnam (Misuri)de Putnam (Missouri), di Putnam (Missouri)County (Missouri)County (Missouri)County (Missouri)de Putnam (Missouri)(, )County, Missouri(, )Putnam, Missouri()
57808
Belgian_Congo
stat_pop2  The Belgian Congo (French: Congo Belge; Dutch: ) was the formal title of present-day Republic of the Congo (DRC) between King Leopold IIs formal relinquishment of his personal control over the state to Belgium on 15 November 1908, and Congolese independence on 30 June 1960.()Congo Free State, 18841908File:LeopoldIIBelgien.jpg|thumb|left|Leopold II, of the Belgians and de facto owner of the Congo Free State from 1885 to 1908.Until the latter part of the 19th century, the Europeans had not yet ventured into the Congo. The rainforest, swamps and malaria, and other diseases such as sleeping sickness made it a difficult environment for European exploration and exploitation. In 1876, King Lopold II of the Belgians organized the International African Association with the cooperation of the leading African explorers and the support of several European governments for the promotion of African exploration and colonization. After Morton Stanley explored the region, a journey that ended in 1878, Leopold courted the explorer and hired him to help establish Leopolds interests in the region.(Hochschild 6167.)Lopold II had been keen to acquire a colony for Belgium even before he ascended to the throne in 1865. He was convinced that the acquisition of a colony would bestow international prestige on his relatively young and small home country and that it might provide a steady source of income. Belgium was not greatly interested in its monarchs dreams of empire-building. Ambitious and stubborn, Lopold II decided to pursue the matter on his own account.European rivalry in Central Africa led to diplomatic tensions, in particular with regard to the largely unclaimed Congo river basin. In November 1884, von Bismarck convened a 14-nation conference (the Conference) to find a peaceful resolution to the Congo crisis. After three months of negotiation on 5 February 1885, the Berlin Conference reached agreement. While it did not formally approve or disapprove the territorial claims of the European powers in Central Africa, it did agree on a set of rules to ensure a conflict-free partitioning of the region. Key among those were the recognition of the Congo basin as a free-trade zone, and the general acceptance of the principle that any territorial claim needed to be backed up by evidence of actual and durable occupation of that territory. In reality, Leopold II emerged triumphant from the Berlin Conference.(Hochschild 8487.) In a series of bilateral diplomatic agreements, France was given  on the north bank of the Congo river (modern of the Congo and the African Republic), Portugal  to the south (part of modern Angola), and Leopolds wholly owned, single-shareholder philanthropic organization received the balance: , to be constituted as the Free State.The Congo Free State was a corporate state privately controlled by Leopold II, King of the Belgians through a dummy non-governmental organization, the Internationale Africaine. Leopold was the sole shareholder and chairman. The state included the entire area of the present Republic of the Congo and existed from 1885 to 1908, when it was annexed by the government of Belgium.Initially, the occupation and exploration of the immense territory of the Congo Free State proved a heavy burden on the monarchs purse. Twice, state bankruptcy was avoided by the Belgian state granting Leopold II emergency loans. In the 1890s, the tide turned dramatically. Through the forced exploitation of rubber, copper, and other minerals in the upper River basin, together with the global rubber boom, huge surpluses were generated. Leopold II used part of this new wealth for the embellishment of his native country: the Royal Galleries in Ostend, the Palace of the Colonies in Tervuren, or the triumphal arch in Brussels were funded from the profits generated by the Congo. It soon became clear that these profits were generated on the back of brutal mistreatment of the local people and plunder of the Congos natural resources.File:Stamp Belgian Congo 1894 50c.jpg|thumb|left|1894 Free State stamp.Thus, under Leopold IIs administration, the Congo Free State became the site of one of the worst man-made humanitarian disasters of the turn of the 20th century. The report of the British Consul Casement, published in early 1904, was an irrefutable indictment of the rubber system: ..the drowsy, unsupervised machine of coercion which wore out the people and the land.(Ascherson, Neal (1963), The King Incorporated, Leopold the Second and the Congo, London: Granta Books (ed. 1999), p. 250.) In the absence of a census (the first was made in 1924), it is difficult to quantify the population loss of the period, but it must have been very high. According to Roger Casements report, depopulation was caused mainly by four causes: indiscriminate war, starvation, reduction of births, and diseases. Hochschild argues that roughly 10 million perished.() The human suffering inflicted by the rapacious exploitation of the colony was immense.The European and US press exposed the conditions in the Congo Free State to the public in the early 1900s. In 1904, Leopold II was forced to allow an international parliamentary commission of inquiry entry to the Congo Free State. The report of the commission (1905) confirmed most of the charges formulated by Edmund Morel and Roger Casement, but also by Protestant and Catholic missionaries.(Stengers, Jean, Le rle de la commission denqute de 1904-1905 au Congo. In Congo: Mythes et ralits, Bruxelles: Editions Racine, 2005, pp. 159-179.) By 1908, public pressure and diplomatic maneuvers led to the end of Leopold IIs rule and to the annexation of the Congo as a colony of Belgium, known as the Belgian Congo.Belgian colony, 19081960On 18 October 1908 Belgian Parliament voted in favor of annexing the Congo as a Belgian colony. This was only after King Leopold II had  finally given up any hope to maintain a substantial part of the Congo Free State as separate crown property. The government of the Belgian Congo was arranged by the 1908 Colonial Charter.(Senelle, R., and E. Clment (2009), Lopold II et la Charte Coloniale, Brussels: Editions Mols.) Executive power rested with the Belgian Minister of Colonial Affairs, assisted by a Colonial Council (Conseil Colonial). Both resided in Brussels. The Belgian Parliament exercised legislative authority over the Belgian Congo. The highest-ranking representative of the colonial administration in the Congo was the Governor-general. From 1886 until 1926, the Governor-general and his administration were posted in Boma, near the Congo river estuary. From 1926 the colonial capital moved to Lopoldville, some 300 km further upstream in the interior. Initially, the Belgian Congo was administratively divided into four provinces: Lopoldville (or: Congo-Kasa), Equateur, Orientale and Katanga, each presided by a vice-Governor-general. An administrative reform in 1932 increased the number of provinces to six, while demoting the vice-Governor-generals to provincial Governors.The territorial service was the true backbone of the colonial administration.(A good overview in: Dembour, Marie-Bndicte (2000), Recalling the Belgian Congo, Conversations and Introspection, New York: Berghahn Books, pp. 1744.) Each province was divided into a number of districts (24 in all), and each district into territories (some 120 in all). A territory was managed by a territorial administrator, assisted by one or more assistants. The territories were further subdivided into numerous chiefdoms (chefferies), at the head of which the Belgian administration appointed traditional chiefs (chefs coutumiers). The territories administered by one territorial administrator and a handful of assistants were often larger than a few Belgian provinces taken together (the whole Belgian Congo was nearly 80 times larger than the whole of Belgium). Nevertheless, the territorial administrator was expected to inspect his territory and to file detailed annual reports with the provincial administration. In terms of jurisdiction, two systems co-existed: a system of European courts and one of indigenous courts (tribunaux indignes). These indigenous courts were presided over by the traditional chiefs, but had only limited powers and remained under the firm control of the colonial administration. Public order in the colony was maintained by the Force Publique, a locally recruited army under Belgian command. It was only in the 1950s that metropolitan troopsi.e. units of the regular Belgian armywere posted in the Belgian Congo (for instance in Kamina).The colonial stateand in fact any authority exercised by whites in the Congowas often referred to by the Congolese as bula matari. Bula Matari, or break rocks, was one of the names originally given to Stanley, because of the dynamite he used to crush rocks when paving his way through the lower-Congo region.(Likaka, Osumaka (2009), Naming Colonialism, History and Collective Memory in the Congo, 18701960, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, p. 56.) The term Bula Matari came to signify the irresistible and compelling force of the colonial state.When the Belgian government took over the administration from King Leopold II in 1908, the situation in the Congo improved in certain respects. The brutal exploitation and arbitrary use of violence, in which some of the concessionary companies had excelled, were curbed. The tragedy of red rubber was put to a stop. Article 3 of the new Colonial Charter of 18 October 1908 established that: Nobody can be forced to work on behalf of and for the profit of companies or privates. In reality, forced labour, in differing forms and degrees, would not disappear entirely until the end of the colonial period.The transition from the Congo Free State to the Belgian Congo was a break, but it was also marked by a large degree of continuity. The last Governor-general of the Congo Free State, Baron Wahis, remained in office in the Belgian Congo, and the majority of Leopold IIs administration with him.(Stengers, Jean (2005), Congo: Mythes et ralits, Brussels: Editions Racine.) Opening up the Congo and its natural and mineral riches for the Belgian economy remained the main motive for colonial expansion, but all the same other priorities, such as healthcare and basic education, slowly gained in importance.The Belgian Congo was directly involved in the two world wars. During WWI an initial stand-off between the Force Publique and the German colonial army in German East-Africa (Tanganyika) turned into open warfare with a joint Anglo-Belgian invasion of German colonial territory. The Force Publique gained a notable victory when it marched into Tabora in September 1916. After the war, Belgium was rewarded for the participation of the Force Publique in the East African campaign with a League of Nations mandate over the formerly German colony of Ruanda-Urundi. During WWII, the Belgian Congo was a crucial source of income for the Belgian government in exile in London. The Force Publique again participated in the Allied campaigns in Africa. The Congolese forces under the command of Belgian officers notably fought against the Italian colonial army in Ethiopia.(Colonial economic policyThe economic development of the Congo was the colonizers top priority. Under Belgian rule two distinct periods of massive investment in the Congos economic infrastructure stand out: the 1920s and the 1950s.(Vanthemsche, Guy (2007), La Belgique et le Congo, Brussels: Editions Complexe.)After WWI, priority was given to mining (copper and cobalt in Katanga, diamond in Kasai, gold in Ituri) as well as to the transport infrastructure (rail lines Matadi-Lopoldville and Elisabethville-Port Francqui). To obtain the necessary capital, the colonial state gave the private companies to a large extent a free hand. This allowed in particular the Belgian Socit Gnrale to build up an economic empire in the colony. Huge profits were generated and for a large part siphoned off to Europe in the form of dividends.(Buelens,Frans (2007), Congo 1885-1960, Een financiel-economische geschiedenis, Berchem: EPO.) The necessary work force was recruited in the interior of the vast colony with the active support of the territorial administration. In many cases this amounted to forced labour, as in many villages minimum quota of able-bodied workers to be recruited were enforced. In this way, tens of thousands of workers were transferred from the interior to the sparsely populated copper belt in the South (Katanga) to work in the mines. In agriculture too, the colonial state forced a drastic rationalisation of production. The so-called vacant landsi.e. the land that was not directly used by the local tribesfell to the state, who redistributed it to European companies, individual white landowners (colons) or the missions. This way an extensive plantation economy developed. oil production in the Congo increased from 2,500 tons in 1914 to 9,000 tons in 1921 and 230,000 tons in 1957. Cotton production increased from 23,000 tons in 1932 to 127,000 in 1939.()After WWI the system of mandatory cultivation was introduced: Congolese peasants were forced to grow certain cash crops (cotton, coffee, groundnuts) destined for the European market. Territorial administrators and state agronomists had the task to supervise and if necessary sanction those peasants who evaded the hated mandatory cultivation.(Likaka, Osumaka (1997), Rural Society and Cotton in Colonial Zaire, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.)The mobilization of the African work force in the capitalist colonial economy played a crucial role in spreading the use of money in the Belgian Congo. The basic idea was that the development of the Congo had to be borne not by the Belgian taxpayers but by the Congolese themselves. The colonial state needed to be able to levy taxes in money on the Congolese, so it was important that they could earn money by selling their produce or their labour within the framework of the colonial economy.The economic boom of the 1920s turned the Belgian Congo into one of the leading copper ore producers worldwide. In 1926 alone, the Union Minire du Haut Katanga exported more than 80,000 tons of copper ore, a large part of which was processed in Hoboken in Belgium.(Brion, Ren and Jean-Louis Moreau (2006), De la Mine  Mars: la gense dUmicore, Tielt: Lannoo.) In 1928, King Albert I visited the Congo to inaugurate the so-called voie national that linked the Katanga mining region via rail (up to Port Francqui) and river transport (from Port Francqui to Lopoldville) to the Atlantic port of Matadi.During the depression of the 1930s, the export-based Belgian Congo economy was severely hit by the world crisis, because of the drop of international demand of raw materials and agricultural products (for example, the price of peanuts fell from 1.25 francs to 25 cents). In some areas, as in the Katanga mining region, employment declined 70% and in the whole country the exploitation of forced labour was diminished while many forced labourers returned to their villages.After the occupation of Belgium by the Germans in May 1940, the Congo declared itself loyal to the Belgian government in exile in London to continue the war on the Allied side. During WWII, production increased drastically. After Malaysia fell to the Japanese, the Belgian Congo became a strategic supplier of rubber to the Allies. The Belgian Congo was one of the major exporters of uranium to the US during WWII (and the War), particularly from the Shinkolobwe mine. The colony provided the uranium used in the bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945.()After WWII, the colonial state took on a much more active role in the economic and social development of the Belgian Congo. An ambitious ten-year plan was launched in 1949. It put a lot of emphasis on house building, energy supply and health care infrastructure. The ten-year plan ushered in a decade of strong economic growth, from which, for the first time, the Congolese began to benefit on a substantial scale. In 1953, the Congolese were granted the right to buy and sell private property in their own name. In the 1950s, a Congolese middle class, modest at first, but steadily growing, emerged in the main cities (Lopoldville, Elisabethville, Stanleyville, Luluabourg).Civilising missionA key argument that was often invoked as a justification for colonialism in Africa was that of the so-called civilizing mission of the European nations.(Young, Crawford (1994), The African Colonial State in Comparative Perspective, New Haven: Yale University Press, pp. 12224 and 15658.) This was no different with respect to the Belgian Congo. As elsewhere, this self-declared civilizing mission went hand in hand with the goal of economic exploitation and development. Conversion to Catholicism, basic western-style education and improved health care were objectives in their own right, but at the same time helped to integrate what was regarded a primitive society into the western capitalist model, in which workers who were disciplined and healthy, and who had learned to read and write could be efficiently (and cheaply) put to work.The development of education and health care in the Belgian Congo was impressive. The educational system was dominated by the Roman Catholic Church and, in some rare cases, Protestant churches, and the curricula reflected Christian and Western values. Even in 1948, 99.6% of educational facilities were controlled by Christian missions. Indigenous schooling was mainly religious and vocational. Children received basic education such as learning how to read, write and some mathematics. The Belgian Congo was one of the few African colonies in which local languages (Kikongo, Lingala, Tshiluba and Swahili) were taught at primary school. Even so, language policies and colonial domination often went hand in hand, as evidenced by the preference given to Lingalaa semi-artificial language spread through its common use in the Force Publiqueover more local (but also more ancient) indigenous languages such as Lomongo and others.(On this subject see for instance: Fabian, Johannes (1986), Language and Colonial Power, The Appropriation of Swahili in the Former Belgian Congo 18801938, Berkeley: University of California Press.)In 1940 the schooling rates of children between 6 and 14 years old was 12%, reaching 37% in 1954, one of the highest rates in the whole of black Africa. Secondary and higher education for the indigenous population were not developed until relatively late in the colonial period. Black children, in small numbers, began to be admitted to European secondary schools from 1950 onward. The first university in the Belgian Congo, the Catholic of Lovanium, near Lopoldville, opened its doors to black and white students in 1954.(Mantels, Ruben (2007), Geleerd in de tropen, Leuven, Congo en de wetenschap, 1885-1960, Leuven: Universitaire Pers, pp. 201-236.) In 1956 a state university was founded in Elisabethville.Health care too was largely supported by the missions, although the colonial state took an increasing interest. Endemic diseases, such as sleeping sickness, were all but eliminated through large-scale and persistent campaigns.(A critical assessment of the colonial obsession with sleeping sickness in: Lyons, Maryinez (1992), The Colonial Disease, A social history of sleeping sickness in northern Zaire, 19001940, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.) The health care infrastructure expanded steadily throughout the colonial period, with a comparatively high availability of hospital beds relative to the population and with dispensaries set up in the most remote regions.Militair Kamp Leopoldstad.JPG|thumb|right|King Albert I and Queen Elisabeth inspect the military camp of Leopoldville during their visit to the Belgian Congo, 1928.There was a kind of implicit apartheid, as there were curfews for Congolese city-dwellers and other such restrictions were commonplace. Though there were no specific laws (as in South Africa and the South of the United States at the time) barring blacks from entering the same establishments whites frequented, there was de facto segregation in most areas. For example, the city centres were reserved to white population only, while the blacks were organized in cits indignes (ironically called le belge). Hospitals, department stores and other facilities were often reserved for either whites or blacks. In the police, the blacks could not pass the rank of non-commissioned officer. The blacks in the cities could not leave their houses from 9 pm to 4 am. This type of segregation began to disappear gradually only in the 1950s.The popular comic book in the Congo, first published in 1931, provides a good insight in the paternalistic-racist views about primitive Africa that prevailed at the time in Europe.Because of the close interconnection between economic development and the civilizing mission, and because in practice state officials, missionaries and the white executives of the private companies always lend each other a helping hand, the image has emerged that the Belgian Congo in reality was governed by a holy trinity of King-Church-Capital (or: the colonial state, the missions and the Socit Gnrale).The ideology underpinning colonial policy was summed up in a catch-phrase used by Governor-general Pierre Ryckmans (193446): Dominer pour servir (Dominate to serve).(Vanderlinden, Jacques (1994), Pierre Ryckmans 1891-1959, Coloniser dans lhonneur, Brussels: De Boeck.) The colonial government was keen to convey the image of a benevolent and conflict-free administration and of the Belgian Congo as a true model colony. In reality, no or very little attention was paid to the active emancipation of the Congolese. The coloniser alone knew what was good for the Congo. The local population was given no voice in the affairs of the state. It was only in the 1950s that this paternalistic attitude began to change. As from 1953, and even more so after the triumphant visit of King Baudouin to the colony in 1955, Governor-general Lon Ptillon (195258) actively favoured the creation of a Belgian-Congolese community, in which blacks and whites were to be treated as equals.(Ptillon, L. A. M. (1967), Tmoignage et rflexions, Brussels: Renaissance du Livre.) In the 1950s, the most blatant discriminatory measures directed at the Congolese were hastily withdrawn (among these the possibility to inflict corporal punishment by means of the feared chicottea fine whip of hippopotamus hide). In 1957, the first municipal elections open to black voters took place in a handful of the largest citiesLopoldville, Elisabethville and Jadotville.Resistance and voices of dissentCongolese resistance against colonialism was widespread and took many different forms.(Likaka, Osumaka (2009), Naming Colonialism, History and Collective Memory in the Congo, 18701960, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.) Armed resistance occurred sporadically and localized until roughly the end of the Second World War (e.g. revolt of the Pende in 1931, mutiny in Luluabourg 1944). After the end of the Second World War until the late 1950s the so-called pax belgica prevailed. Until the end of colonial rule in 1960, passive forms of resistance and expressions of an anti-colonial sub-culture were manifold (e.g. Kimbanguism, after the prophet Kimbangu, who was imprisoned by the Belgians).Apart from active and passive resistance among the Congolese, the colonial regime over time also elicited internal criticism and dissent. Already in the 1920s, certain members of the Colonial Council in Brussels (among them Octave Louwers) voiced criticism regarding the often brutal recruitment methods employed by the major companies in the mining districts. The stagnation of population growth in many districtsin spite of spectacular successes in the fight against endemic diseases such as sleeping sicknesswas another cause for concern. Low birth rates in the countryside and the depopulation of certain areas were typically attributed to the disruption of traditional community life as a result of forced labour migration and mandatory cultivation.(see for instance a lecture by Nancy Rose Hunt (2002), Rewriting the Soul in Colonial Congo: Flemish Missionaries and Infertility, Antwerp University: http://www.nias.knaw.nl/Ortelius2002.pdf.) Many missionaries who were in daily contact with Congolese villagers, took their plight at heart and sometimes intervened on their behalf with the colonial administration (for instance in land property questions).The missions and certain territorial administrators also played an important role in the study and preservation of Congolese cultural and linguistic traditions and artefacts. One example among many is that of Father Gustaaf Hulstaert (19001990) who in 1937 created the periodical Aequatoria devoted to the linguistic, ethnographic and historical study of the Mongo-people of the central Congo basin.(See: www.aequatoria.be) The colonial state itself took an interest in the cultural and scientific study of the Congo, particularly after the Second World War through the creation of the Institut pour la Recherche Scientifique en Afrique Centrale (IRSAC, 1948).Towards independence 1945-1960In the early 1950s political emancipation of the Congolese elites, let alone of the masses, seemed like a far cry. Nonetheless, it was clear that the Congo could not forever remain immune from the rapid changes that after the World War profoundly affected colonialism all over the world. The independence of the British, French and Dutch colonies in Asia shortly after 1945 had little immediate impact in the Congo, but in the Nations pressure on Belgium (as on other colonial powers) was stepped up. Belgium had ratified article 73 of the Nations Charter, which advocated self-determination, and both superpowers put pressure on Belgium to reform its Congo policy. However, the Belgian government tried to resist as best it could what it labeled interference with its colonial policy.All the same, it was clear to the colonial authorities that something needed to be done to ameliorate the situation of the Congolese. Since the 1940s, the colonial government had experimented in a very modest way with granting a limited elite of so-called volus more civil rights, holding out the eventual prospect of a limited amount of political influence. To this end deserving Congolese could apply for a proof of civil merit, or, one step up, immatriculation (registration), i.e. official evidence of their assimilation with European civilisation. To acquire this status, the applicant had to fulfill strict conditions (monogamous matrimony, evidence of good behaviour, etc.) and submit to stringent controls (including house visits). This policy was a failure. By the mid-1950s, there were at best a few thousand Congolese who had successfully obtained the civil merit diploma or been granted immatriculation. The supposed benefits attached to itincluding equal legal status with the white populationproved often more theory than reality and led to open frustration with the volus. When Governor-General Ptillon began to speak about granting the native people more civil rights, even suffrage, to create what he termed a Belgo-Congolese community, his ideas were met with indifference from Brussels and often with open hostility from parts of the Belgians in the Congo, who feared for their privileges.(Ndaywel  Nziem, Isidore (1998), Histoire gnrale du Congo, Paris-Brussels: De Boeck & Larcier, pp. 45663.)It became increasingly evident that the Belgian government lacked a strategic long-term vision in relation to the Congo. This was due partly to the fact that colonial affairs did not generate much interest or political debate in Belgium, so long as the colony seemed to be thriving and calm. A notable exception was the young King Baudouin I of the Belgians, who had succeeded his father, Lopold III, under dramatic circumstances in 1951, when Lopold was forced to abdicate because of his wartime role. Baudouin took a lively interest in the Congo. On his first state visit to the Belgian Congo in 1955, he was welcomed enthusiastically by cheering crowds of whites and blacks alike, as captured in Cauvins documentary film Bwana Kitoko.() Foreign observers, such as the international correspondent of The Manchester Guardian, remarked that Belgian paternalism seemed to work, and contrasted Belgiums seemingly loyal and enthusiastic colonial subjects with the restless French and British colonies. On the occasion of his visit, King Baudouin openly endorsed the Governor-Generals vision of a Belgo-Congolese community, but in practice this idea progressed slowly. At the same time, divisive ideological and linguistic issues in Belgium, which heretofore had been successfully kept out of the colonys affairs, now began to make themselves felt in the Congo as well. These included the rise of unionism among workers, the call for public (state) schools to break the missions monopoly on education, and the call for equal treatment in the colony of the two national languages, French and Dutch. Until then, French had been promoted as the unique colonial language. The Governor-General feared that such divisive issues would undermine the authority of the colonial government in the eyes of the Congolese, while also diverting attention from the more pressing need for true emancipation.Political organisationAs a result of the inability of the colonial government to introduce radical and credible changes, the Congolese elites began to take matters more and more in their own hands by organising themselves socially and soon also politically. In fact, it can be argued that the seeds of Congos post-independence woes were sown in the emergence in the 1950s of two markedly different forms of nationalism among the Congolese elites. The nationalist movementwhich the Belgian authorities, to some degree, turned a blind eye topromoted nationalism wherein the Belgian Congo would become one politically united state after independence. In opposition to this was the ethno-religious and regional nationalism that took hold in the Bakongo territories of the west coast, Kasai, and Katanga. The first political organisations were of the latter type. ABAKO, founded in 1950 as the Association culturelle des Bakongo (lower-Congo region) and headed by Kasa-Vubu, was initially a cultural association that soon turned political and from the mid-1950s became a vocal opponent of Belgian colonial rule. Additionally the organization continued to serve as the major ethno-religious organization for the Bakongo and became closely intertwined with the Kimbanguist Church which was extremely popular in the lower Congo.In 1955, Belgian professor van Bilsen published a treatise called Thirty Year Plan for the Political Emancipation of Belgian Africa.(Gerard-Libois, Jules (1989), Vers lIndpendance: une acclration imprvue, In Congo-Zare, Brussels: GRIP, pp. 43-56.) The timetable called for the gradual emancipation of the Congo over a thirty-year periodthe time Van Bilsen expected it would take to create an educated elite who could replace the Belgians in positions of power. The Belgian government and many of the volus were suspicious of the planthe former because it meant eventually giving up the Congo, and the latter because Belgium would still be ruling Congo for another three decades. A group of Catholic volus responded positively to the plan with a moderate manifesto in a Congolese journal called Conscience Africaine, with their only point of disagreement being the amount of Congolese participation.(Kalulambi Pongo, Martin (2009), Le manifeste Conscience africaine: gense, influences et ractions, In Tousignant, Nathalie (ed.), Le manifeste Conscience africaine, 1956, Brussels: Facults Universitaires Saint-Louis, pp. 59-81.)File:PatricelumumbaIISG.jpg|thumb|right|Lumumba.In 1957, by way of experiment, the colonial government organised in three urban centres (Lopoldville, Elisabethville and Jadotville) the first municipal elections in which Congolese were allowed to stand for office and cast their vote. Events in 1957-58 led to a sudden acceleration in the demands for political emancipation. This was in part influenced by developments outside the Congo, notably the independence of Ghana in 1957 and President De Gaulles August 1958 visit to Brazzaville, the capital of the Congo on the other side of the Congo opposite Lopoldville, in which he promised Frances African colonies the free choice between a continued association with France or full independence. The World Exhibition organised in Brussels in 1958 (58) proved another eye-opener for many Congolese leaders, who were allowed to travel to Belgium for the first time.(Aziza Etambala, Zana (2008), De teloorgang van een modelkolonie, Belgisch Congo 1958-1960, Leuven: Acco, pp. 105-110.) In 1958, the demands for independence radicalised quickly and gained momentum. A key role was played by the National Congolais (MNC). First set up in 1956, the MNC established itself in October 1958 as a national political party that supported the idea of a unitary and centralised Congolese nation after independence. Its most influential leader was the charismatic Lumumba. In 1959, an internal split was precipitated by Kalonji and other MNC leaders who favoured a more moderate political stance (the splinter group was deemed National Congolais-Kalonji. Despite the organisational divergence of the party, Lumumbas leftist faction (now the National Congolais-Lumumba) and the MNC collectively had established themselves as by far the most important and influential party in the Belgian Congo. Belgium vehemently opposed Lumumbas leftist views and had grave concerns about the status of their financial interests should Lumumbas MNC gain power.DipendaIn the winter of 1958-59, while the Belgian government was debating a programme to gradually extend the political emancipation of the Congolese population, it was overtaken by events. On 4 January 1959, a prohibited political manifestation organised in Lopoldville by ABAKO got out of hand. At once, the colonial capital was in the grip of heavy rioting. It took the authorities several days to restore order and by the most conservative count several hundred died. The eruption of violence sent a shockwave through the Congo and Belgium alike. On 13 January, King Baudouin solemnly declared in a radio address that Belgium would work towards the full independence of the Congo without hesitation, but also without irresponsible rashness. Without committing to a specific date for independence, the government of prime minister Gaston Eyskens had a multi-year transition period in mind during which provincial elections would take place in December 1959, national elections in 1960 or 1961, after which administrative and political responsibilities would be gradually transferred to the Congolese, in a process presumably to be completed towards the mid-1960s. On the ground the reality looked quite different.(Young, Crawford (1965), Politics in the Congo, Decolonization and independence, Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp. 140161.) Increasingly, the colonial administration saw itself confronted with non-cooperation (e.g. refusal to pay taxes). In some regions anarchy threatened.(Ryckmans, Genevive (1995), Andr Ryckmans, un territorial du Congo belge. Paris. LHarmattan, pp. 215-224.) At the same time it was clear that an important portion of the Belgian population in the Congo opposed the idea of independence and felt betrayed by Brussels. In those circumstances, and faced with a radicalisation of Congolese demands, the chances of a gradual and carefully planned transition towards independence dwindled rapidly. In 1959, King Baudouin made another visit to the Belgian Congo. The contrast with his 1955 visit could not have been greater. Upon his arrival in Lopoldville/Kinshasa he was pelted with rocks by blacks who were angry with the imprisonment of Lumumba, convicted because of incitement against the colonial government. Though Baudouins reception in other cities was considerably better, the shouts of Vive le roi! were often followed by Indpendance immdiate! The Belgian government wanted to avoid at all cost being drawn into a futile and potentially very bloody colonial war, as had happened to France in Vietnam and Algeria or to the Netherlands in Indonesia. For that reason, it was all the more inclined to give in to the demands for immediate independence voiced ever more vocally by the Congolese leaders. It was hoped that somehow, and in spite of the lack of preparations (including the lack of an educated elite: there were only a handful of Congolese holding a university degree at that time), miraculously, things might work out (what came to be known as le pari congolaisthe Congolese bet).In January 1960, Congolese political leaders were invited to Brussels to participate in a round-table conference to discuss independence. Patrice Lumumba was discharged from prison for the occasion. The conference agreed surprisingly quickly to grant the Congolese practically all of their demands: a general election to be held in May 1960 and full independenceDipendaon 30 June 1960. This was in no small measure thanks to the strong united front put up by the Congolese delegation. The political manoeuvering ahead of the elections resulted in the emergence of three political alliances: a coalition of the federalistic nationalists consisting of six separatist parties or organisations, two of which were ABAKO and the MNC - Kalonji, the centralist MNC-Lumumba, and finally that of the strong-man of Katanga, Mose Tshombe, conscious of the economic vitality of its area and the business interests of the Mining Union (just like Kalonji with respect to the diamond exploitations in Kasa). The parlementiary elections resulted in a divided political landscape, with both the regionalist factionschief among them ABAKOand the nationalist parties such as the MNC, doing well. As time until independence day was running out, a compromise arrangement was forced through, with Kasa-vubu becoming the first president of the Republic of the Congo and Lumumba its first head of government.As planned, scarcely five months earlier, the hand-over ceremony took place on 30 June 1960. The location was the new residence of the Governor-General of the Belgian Congo in Lopoldville (which had only been recently built  in itself an indication of how unexpectedly independence came to the Congo).The ceremony was overshadowed by a significant incident: in his speech King Baudouin, rather inappropriately, praised the genius of his forefather King Lopold II, founder of the Free State, and the blessings of Belgian colonial rule. Prime Minister Lumumba retorted with a vehement indictment of colonial oppression.Scarcely one week after the handover of sovereignty a rebellion broke out within the Force Publique against its officers, who were still predominantly Belgian. This was the signal for disturbances all over the Congo, mainly instigated by dissatisfied soldiers and radicalised youngsters. In many areas violence specifically targeted European victims. Within weeks, the largest part of the 80,000+ Belgians who were still working and living in the Congo were evacuated in all haste and often under traumatic circumstances by the Army and later by the United Nations intervention force.(Verlinden, Peter (2002), Weg uit Congo, Het drama van de kolonialen, Leuven: Davidsfonds)Belgian Congo after 1960The rebellion that had started in Thyssville in the Bas-Congo in July 1960 quickly spread to the rest of the Congo.(For an overview of developments in the Congo after 1960 see: OBallance, Edgar (2000), The Congo-Zaire Experience, 196098, Houndmills: MacMillan Press.) In September 1960, President Kasa-Vubu declared prime minister Lumumba deposed from his functions and vice versa. The stalemate was ended with the arrest of Lumumba. In January 1961, he was flown to the rich mining province of Katanga, which by that time had declared a secession from Lopoldville under the leadership of Mose Tshombe (with active Belgian support). Patrice Lumumba was brutally murdered (in 2002 Belgium officially apologised for its role in the elimination of Lumumba; the CIA too has been suspected of complicity).(An illuminating first-hand account of the CIAs activities in the Congo in 196061 in: Devlin, Larry (2008), Chief of Station, Congo: Fighting the Cold War in a Hot Zone, Cambridge: PublicAffairs) A series of rebellions and separatist movements seemed to shatter the dream of a unitary Congolese state at its birth. Although independent, Belgian paratroopers intervened in the Congo on various occasions to protect and evacuate fellow citizens. The United Nations maintained a large peace-keeping operation in the Congo from late 1960 onward. The situation stabilised only in 196465, with the re-integration of the Katanga province and the end of the so-called Rebellion in Stanleyville (province Orientale). Shortly after that army colonel Dsir Mobutu ended the political impasse by seizing power himself.Mobutu enjoyed the support of the West, and in particular of the States, because of his strong anti-communist stance. Initially his rule favoured consolidation and economic development (e.g. by building the Inga-dam that had been planned in the 1950s). In order to distance himself from the previous colonial regime, he launched a campaign of Congolese authenticity. As a result the colonial place names were abandoned in 1966: Lopoldville became Kinshasa, Elisabethville Lubumbashi, Stanleyville Kisangani. During this period, the Congo maintained close economic and political ties with Belgium, although these were occasionally overshadowed by the financial issues that had remained unresolved after independence (the so-called contentieux), for instance the transfer of shares in the big mining companies that had been held directly by the colonial state.(Willame, Jean-Claude (1989), Vingt-cinq ans de rlations belgo-zaroises, In Congo-Zare, Brussels: GRIP, pp. 145-58.) In 1970, on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of independence, King Baudouin paid an official state visit to the Congo.Mobutus regime radicalised during the 1970s. The Mouvement populaire de la Rvolution (MPR), of which Mobutu was the prsident-fondateur, firmly established one-party rule. Political repression increased considerably. Mobutu now renamed the Congo into the republic of Zare. The so-called zarisation of economic life in the mid-1970s led to an exodus of foreign workers and an unmitigated economic disaster. In the 1980s the Mobutu regime became a byword for mismanagement and corruption.(Wrong, Michela (2001), Living on the brink of disaster in Mobutus Congo, In the footsteps of Mr Kurtz, New York: HarperCollins, pp. 195200.) Relations with the former colonial power Belgium went through a series of ups and downs, reflecting a steady decline in the underlying economic, financial and political interests. After the end of the War, Mobutu lost support in the West. As a result, in 1990, he decided to end the one-party system and dramatically announced a return to democracy, but subsequently dragged his feet and played out his opponents against one another to gain time. A bloody intervention of the Zarian Army against students on the Lubumbashi University Campus in May 1990 precipitated a break in diplomatic relations between Belgium and Zare. Pointedly, Mobutu was not invited to attend the funeral of King Baudouin in 1993, which he considered a grave personal affront. Finally, in 1997 Mobutu was chased from power by a rebel force headed by Kabila, who declared himself president and renamed Zare into the Republic of the Congo. Assassinated in 2001, Laurent-Dsir Kabila was succeeded by his son Kabila, who in 2006 was confirmed as president through the first nation-wide free elections in the Congo since 1960. On 30 June - 2 July 2010, King Albert II of the Belgians and Leterme, the Belgian Prime Minister, visited Kinshasa to attend the festivities marking the 50th anniversary of Congolese independence from Belgium.Certain practices and traditions from the colonial period have survived into the independent Congolese state, such as a strong centralising and bureaucratic tendency, or the organisational structure of the education system and the judiciary. The influence of the Congo on Belgium has manifested itself mainly in economic terms: through the activities of the Union Minire (now Umicore), the development of a nonferrous metal industry, and the development of the Antwerp harbour and diamond industry. To this day, Airlines (successor of the former Sabena) has maintained a strong presence in the DRC. It is estimated that there currently (2010) remain more than 4,000 Belgians resident in the DRC, while the Congolese community in Belgium is at least 16,000 strong. The Matonge quarter in Brussels (Porte de Namur) is the traditional meeting point of the Congolese community in Belgium.(Swyngedouw, Eva and Erik Swyngedouw (2009), The Congolese Diaspora in Brussels and hybrid identity formation, In Urban Research & Practice, vol 2, 1, pp. 68-90.)In popular cultureThe Belgian Congo features prominently or as a backdrop in some great works of Western literature. Among those are:*Conrad (1902), of Darkness;*Gide (1927), au Congo;*Waugh (1931), people;*Hulme (1956), Nuns Story (also 1959 film by Zinnemann, starring Hepburn);*Greene (1959), burnt-out case;*Joris (1987), naar Congo.*Kingsolver (1998), Poisonwood BibleColonie belge - usually depicting a black prisoner being flogged by a black guardian under the watchful eye of a white official  is a recurring theme in Congolese paintings by artists like Tshibumba Kanda-Matulu, C. Mutomobo and others.(Fabian, Johannes (1996), Remembering the Present, Painting and Popular History in Zare, Narrative and Paintings by Tshibumba Kanda Matulu, Berkeley: University of California Press.)Governors-General* Baron Wahis (November 1908  May 1912; originally appointed by Leopold II in 1900)* Alexandre Fuchs (May 1912January 1916)* Joseph Marie Henry (January 1916January 1921)* Maurice Eugne Auguste Lippens (January 1921January 1923)* Martin Joseph Marie Ren Rutten (January 1923December 1927)* Auguste Constant Tilkens (December 1927September 1934)* Pierre Marie Joseph Ryckmans (September 1934July 1946)* Jacques Pierre Louis Jungers (July 1946January 1952)* Lon Antoine Marie Ptillon (January 1952July 1958)* Henri Arthur Adolf Marie Christopher Cornelis (July 1958June 1960)See also* Publique* Belgian Forces* of Darkness* in the Congo* of Lovanium* Didnt Start the Fire (song by Joel)* Leopolds Ghost* Lumumba* (film), a biographical film directed by Raoul PeckReferencesBooks****External links*Belgian Congo article in Encyclopdia Britannica 1922 extension.*Oasis Kodila Tedika and Francklin Kyayima Muteba. Sources of growth in Democratic Republic of the Congo before independence. A cointegration analysis. Revue congolaise dconomie/ Congo Economic Review. Document de Travail/ Working Paper. WP02/10 July2006.KongoCongoder Demokratischen Republik Kongo#Belgisch-KongoBelgaBelgabelgeBelgaBelgiaBelgaya KibelgijiKongasya bank (Kong-Kinss)KongBelgenl:Belgisch-Congoja:BelgijskieBelgaKongoKongoKongosubedjeCongozh:
57974
Battle_of_Britain
groupnb| casualties2  2,698 aircrew killed(Bungay 2000, p. 373.)967 captured638 missing bodies identified by British Authorities(Overy 2001, p. 113.)1,887 aircraft destroyed| casualties3 | notes        }}The Battle of Britain (German: Luftschlacht um England or Luftschlacht um Grobritannien, literally Air battle for England or Air battle for Great Britain) is the name given to the War II air campaign waged by the German Air Force (Luftwaffe) against the United Kingdom during the summer and autumn of 1940. The objective of the campaign was to gain superiority over the Air Force (RAF), especially Fighter Command. The name derives from a famous speech delivered by Prime Minister Churchill in the House of Commons: ...the of France is over. I expect that the Battle of Britain is about to begin.(Battle of Britain 1940. Battle of Britain. Retrieved: 28 June 2010.)(Audio Clip of Churchills speech. UK: BBC. Retrieved: 28 June 2010.)The Battle of Britain was the first major campaign to be fought entirely by air forces,(92 Squadron  Geoffrey Wellum. Battle of Britain Memorial Flight via raf.mod.uk. Retrieved: 17 November 2010.) and was also the largest and most sustained aerial bombing campaign to that date. From July 1940 coastal shipping convoys and shipping centres, such as Portsmouth, were the main targets; one month later the Luftwaffe shifted its attacks to RAF airfields and infrastructure. As the battle progressed the Luftwaffe also targeted aircraft factories and ground infrastructure. Eventually the Luftwaffe resorted to attacking areas of political significance and using terror bombing tactics.The failure of Germany to achieve its objectives of destroying Britains defences, or forcing Britain to negotiate an armistice or an outright surrender, is considered its first major defeat and one of the crucial turning points in the war.(Bungay 2000, p. 388.) If Germany had gained air superiority over England, Hitler might have launched Sea Lion, an amphibious and airborne invasion of Britain.BackgroundImage:Churchill portrait NYP 45063 edit1.jpg|right|thumb|upright|British Prime Minister ChurchillFollowing the evacuation of British and French soldiers from Dunkirk and the French surrender on 22 June 1940, Adolf Hitler was mainly focused on the possibilities of invading the Union(Ray 2003, p. 62.) while believing that the British, defeated on the continent and without European allies, would quickly come to terms.(Bungay 2000, p. 9.) Although the Foreign Secretary, Lord Halifax, and an element of British public and political sentiment favoured a negotiated peace with an ascendant Germany, Churchill, newly installed as Prime Minister, and a majority of his Cabinet refused to consider an armistice with Hitler.(Bungay 2000, p. 11.) Instead Churchill used his skilful rhetoric to harden public opinion against capitulation, and to prepare the British for a long war.On 11 July, Grand Admiral Raeder, Commander-in-Chief of the Kriegsmarine (German Navy), told Hitler that an invasion could only be contemplated as a last resort, and only after full air superiority had been achieved. The Kriegsmarine had been nearly crippled by the Campaign, with many of its ships having been sunk or damaged, while the Navy still had over 50 destroyers, 21 cruisers and eight battleships in the British Fleet.(Ellis 1990, p. 15.)(RN Strength returns.  Naval History, 9 April 2009.  Retrieved 12 April 2008.) There was little the weakened Kriegsmarine could do to stop the Royal Navy from intervening. The only alternative was to use the Luftwaffes bombers and bombers, which required superiority to operate effectively. Grand Admiral Raeder said, A powerful and effective air force might create conditions favourable for an invasion, whether it could was not in the Navy War Staffs province.(Taylor, Blaine. Battle of Britain Magazine, Volume 1, 1991, p. 15.)On 16 July, although he agreed with Raeder, Hitler ordered the preparation of a plan to invade Britain;(Bungay 2000, p. 111.) he also hoped that news of the preparations would frighten Britain into peace negotiations.  Directive No. 16; On the Preparation of a Landing Operation against England read, in part, as follows:All preparations were to be made by mid-August.The plan, code named Seelwe (Operation Sealion), was submitted by OKW (der Wehrmacht or High Command of the Armed Forces) and was scheduled to take place in mid-September 1940. Seelwe called for landings on the south coast of Great Britain, backed by an airborne assault. Neither Hitler nor OKW believed it would be possible to carry out a successful amphibious assault on Britain until the RAF had been neutralised. Raeder believed that air superiority might make a successful landing possible although it would be a risky operation and required absolute mastery over the Channel by our air forces.(Raeder 2001, p. 321.)Conversely Grand Admiral Dnitz believed air superiority was not enough. Dnitz stated, we possessed neither control of the air or the sea; nor were we in any position to gain it.(Dnitz 1958 (1997 edition), p. 114.) Some writers, such as Derek Robinson, have agreed with Dnitz. Robinson argues that the massive superiority of the Royal Navy over the Kriegsmarine would have made Sealion a disaster and the Luftwaffe could not have prevented decisive intervention by British cruisers and destroyers, even with air superiority.(Robinson 2005)(Taylor and Mayer 1974, p. 72.) Williamson Murray argued the task facing the Germans in the summer, 1940 was beyond their capabilities. The three German armed services were not capable of solving the problem of invading the British Isles. Murray contends that the Kriegsmarine had been effectively eliminated owing to heavy losses during the Campaign.(Murray 1983, p. 45.) Murray states it is doubtful that the Kriegsmarine and Luftwaffe could have prevented the Royal Navy engaging the invasion fleet.(Murray 1983, p. 46.)Opposing forcesThe Luftwaffe faced a more capable opponent than any it had previously met: a sizeable, highly coordinated, well-supplied, modern air force.FightersFile:602sqdn-spit1.jpg|thumb|X4382, a late production Spitfire Mk I of 602 Squadron flown by P/O Osgood Hanbury, Westhampnett, September 1940The Luftwaffes Messerschmitt Bf 109E and Bf 110C squared off against the RAFs workhorse Hurricane Mk I and the less numerous Spitfire Mk I. The Bf 109E had a better climb rate and was 10 to 30 mph faster than the Hurricane, depending on altitude.(Bungay 2000, p. 266.) In the spring and summer of 1940, RAF fighters benefited from increased availability of 100 octane aviation fuel, which allowed their Merlin engines to generate significantly more power through the use of an Emergency Boost Override.(Sarkar 2011, pp. 6667.)(McKinstry 2010, p. 86.)(Jones 1970, p. 187.) In September 1940 the more powerful Mk IIa series 1 Hurricanes started entering service although only in small numbers.(Ramsay 1989, pp. 415, 516, 526, 796.) This version was capable of a maximum speed of 342 mph, some 25 to 30 mph faster than the Mk I.(Mason 1991, pp. 279, 300.)The performance of the Spitfire over Dunkirk came as a surprise to the Jagdwaffe, although the German pilots retained a strong belief that the 109 was the superior fighter.(Holmes 1998, pp. 1819.) However, the Bf 109E had a much larger turning circle than either the Hurricane or the Spitfire.(Bungay 2000, pp. 265266.) The two British fighters were equipped with eight Browning 303 machine guns, while most Bf 109Es had two machine guns and two wing cannons. The Bf 109E and the Spitfire were superior to each other in key areas; for instance, at some altitudes, the Bf 109 could out-climb the British fighter. In general, though, as Alfred Price noted in The Spitfire Story:The Bf 109 was also used as a fighter-bomberthe E-4/B and E-7 models could carry a 250 kg bomb underneath the fuselage. The Bf 109, unlike the Stuka, could fight on equal terms with RAF fighters after releasing its ordnance.(Feist 1993, p. 29.)(Green 1980, p. 73.)At the start of the battle, the twin-engined Messerschmitt Bf 110 long range Zerstrer (Destroyer) was also expected to engage in air-to-air combat while escorting the Luftwaffe bomber fleet. Although the 110 was faster than the Hurricane and almost as fast as the Spitfire, its lack of manoeuvrability and acceleration meant that it was a failure as a long-range escort fighter. On 13 and 15 August, 13 and 30 aircraft were lost, the equivalent of an entire Gruppe, and the types worst losses during the campaign.(Weal 1999, pp. 4748.) This trend continued with a further eight and 15 lost on 16 and 17 August.(Weal 1999, p. 49.) Gring ordered the Bf 110 units to operate where the range of the single-engined machines were not sufficient.The most successful role of the Bf 110 during the battle was as a Schnellbomber (fast bomber). The Bf 110 usually used a shallow dive to bomb the target and escaped at high speed.((Weal 1999, pp. 4251.) One unit, Erprobungsgruppe 210, proved that the Bf 110 could be used to good effect in attacking small or pinpoint targets.(Bungay 2000, pp. 257258.)File:Messerschmitt Bf 109E.jpg|thumb|right|Bf 109E-4.The RAFs Paul Defiant had some initial success over Dunkirk(Green 1962, p. 33.) because of its resemblance to the Hurricane; Luftwaffe fighters attacking from the rear were surprised by its unusual gun turret. However, during the Battle of Britain, this single-engined two-seater proved hopelessly outclassed. For various reasons, the Defiant lacked any form of forward firing armament and the heavy turret meant it could not out-run or out-manoeuvre either the Bf 109 or Bf 110. By the end of August, after disastrous losses, the aircraft was withdrawn from daylight service.(Bungay 2000, pp. 84, 178, 269273.)(Ansell 2005, pp. 712714.)Fighter formationsFile:Spitfires camera gun film shows tracer ammunition.jpg|thumb|left|camera film shows tracer ammunition from a Supermarine Spitfire Mark I of 609 Squadron, flown by Lieutenant J H G McArthur, hitting a He 111 on its starboard quarter.In the late 1930s, Fighter Command expected to face only bombers over Britain, not single-engined fighters. With this in mind, a series of Fighting Area Tactics were formulated and rigidly adhered to, involving a series of manoeuvres designed to concentrate a squadrons firepower to bring down bombers: with no apparent prospect of escorting fighters to worry about, RAF fighter pilots flew in tight, vee-shaped sections (vics) of three. These restricted squadrons to tight 12 aircraft formations composed of four sections in another tight V. With this formation, only the leader at the front was free to watch for the enemy; the other pilots had to concentrate on keeping station.(Bungay 2000, p. 249.) RAF fighter training also emphasised by-the-book attacks by sections breaking away in sequence. Fighter Command recognised the weaknesses of this rigid structure early in the battle, but it was felt too risky to change tactics during the battle, because replacement pilotsoften with only minimal flying timecould not be readily retrained,(Price 1996, p. 26.) and inexperienced RAF pilots needed firm leadership in the air only rigid formations could provide.(Bungay 2000, p. 250.) German pilots dubbed the RAF formations Idiotenreihen (rows of idiots) because they left squadrons vulnerable to attack.((Holmes 2007, p. 61.)By contrast the, Luftwaffe formations employed a loose section of two (nicknamed the Rotte), based on a leader (Rottenfhrer) followed at a distance of about 183 meters (200 yards) by his wingman (nicknamed the Rottenhund or Katschmareks), who also flew slightly higher and was trained to always stay with his leader. While the leader was free to search for enemy aircraft, and could cover his wingmans blind spots, his wingman could concentrate on searching the airspace in the leaders blind spots, behind and below. Attacking aircraft could be sandwiched between the two 109s.(Price 1980, pp. 1213.)  The rotte allowed the Rottenfhrer to concentrate on getting kills although this led to some grievances in the lower ranks because it was felt that the high scores of some Rottenfhrer came at the expense of the Katschmareks. During the Battle of Britain, a pilot who shot down 20 aircraft was automatically awarded the Ritterkreuz (Knights Cross), to which was added Oak Leaves, Swords, and Diamonds for each additional 20 aircraft. Those pilots who appeared to be pursuing these awards were said to be suffering from Halsweh (a sore throat), a reference to the convention of wearing the decoration at the neck. Few wingmen in Luftwaffe fighter formations were able to shoot down opposing aircraft, while their formation leaders were scoring heavily.(Bungay 2000, pp. 163164.)Two of these sections were usually teamed up into a Schwarm, where all the pilots could watch what was happening around them. Each Schwarm in a Staffel flew at staggered heights and with 183 meters (200 yards) of room between them, making the formation difficult to spot at longer ranges and allowing for a great deal of flexibility.( By utilising a tight cross-over turn, a Schwarm could quickly change direction.(The Me 110 fighters adopted the same Schwarm formation as the 109s, but were seldom able to use this to the same advantage. When attacked, Zerstrergruppen increasingly resorted to forming large defensive circles. Each Bf 110 guarded the tail of the aircraft ahead of it. Gring ordered that they be renamed offensive circles in a vain bid to improve rapidly declining morale.(Weal 1999, p. 50.) These conspicuous formations were often successful in attracting RAF fighters that were sometimes bounced by high-flying Bf 109s. This led to the often repeated myth that the Bf 110s were escorted by Bf 109s. The Bf 110s most successful method of attack was the bounce from above.Front line RAF pilots were acutely aware of the inherent deficiencies of their own tactics. A compromise was adopted whereby squadron formations used much looser formations with one or two weavers flying independently above and behind to provide increased observation and rear protection; these tended to be the least experienced men and were often the first to be shot down without the other pilots even noticing that they were under attack.((Price 1980, pp. 2830.) During the battle, 74 Squadron under Squadron Leader Adolph Sailor Malan adopted a variation of the German formation called the fours in line astern, which was a vast improvement on the old three aircraft vic. Malans formation was later generally used by Fighter Command.(Price 1996, p. 55.)BombersImage:Heinkel He 111 during the Battle of Britain.jpg|thumb|He 111 bombers during the Battle of BritainThe Luftwaffes four primary bombers were the He 111, Do 17, and Ju 88 for level bombing, and the Ju 87 Stuka for diving attacks. The Heinkel He 111 was used in greater numbers than the others during the conflict and is better known, partly due to its distinctive wing shape. Each level bomber also had a few reconnaissance versions that were used during the battle.(Price 1980, pp. 610.)Although successful in previous Luftwaffe engagements, the Stuka suffered heavy losses in the Battle of Britain, particularly on 18 August, due to its slow speed and vulnerability to fighter interception after the dive bombing. As a result of the losses and limited payload and range, Stuka units were largely removed from operations over England and concentrated on shipping instead until they were re-deployed to the Eastern Front in 1941. They returned on occasion, such as on the 13 September attack on Tangmere airfield.(Wood and Dempster 2003, p. 228.)(Smith 2002, p. 51.)(Ward 2004, p. 107.)The remaining three bomber types differed in their capabilities; the Heinkel 111 was the slowest; the Ju 88 was the fastest once its mainly external bomb load was dropped; and the Do 17 had the smallest bomb load.( All three bomber types suffered heavy losses from British fighters, but the Ju 88 disproportionately so. The German bombers required constant protection by the Luftwaffes fighter force. There were not enough Bf 109Es to support more than 300400 bombers on any given day.(Wright 1968, p. 31.) Later in the conflict, when night bombing became more frequent, all three were used. However, due to its reduced bomb load, the lighter Do 17 was used less than the He 111 and Ju 88 for this purpose.On the British side, three bombers were mostly used on night operations against targets such as factories, invasion ports and railway centres; the Whitworth Whitley, the Hampden and the Wellington were classified as heavy bombers by the RAF, although the Hampden was a medium bomber comparable to the He 111. The twin-engined Blenheim and the obsolescent single-engined Battle were both light bombers; the Blenheim was the most numerous of the aircraft equipping Bomber Command and was used in attacks against shipping, ports, airfields and factories on the continent by day and by night. The Fairey Battle squadrons, which had suffered heavy losses in daylight attacks during the Battle of France, were brought up to strength with reserve aircraft and continued to operate at night in attacks against the invasion ports, until the Battle was withdrawn from UK front line service in October 1940.(Fairey Battle. airlandseaweapons.devhub.com,  16 August 2009. Retrieved: 3 November 2010.)PilotsBefore the war, the RAFs processes for selecting potential candidates was opened to men of all social classes through the creation of the Volunteer Reserve in 1936 which ...was designed to appeal, to...young men...without any class distinctions...(Terraine 1985, pp. 4445.) The older squadrons of the Auxiliary Air Force did retain some of their upper class exclusiveness(Bungay 2000, p. 86.) but their number were soon swamped by the newcomers of the RAFVR and by Sept 1 1939, 6646 pilots had been trained through the RAFVR.(Terraine 1985, p. 44.)By summer 1940, there were about 9,000 pilots in the RAF for approximately 5,000 aircraft, most of which were bombers.  Fighter Command was never short of pilots, but the problem of finding sufficient numbers of fully trained fighter pilots became acute by mid-August 1940.(Bishop 1968, pp. 8587.) At all times, new pilots had almost no chance at all of surviving their first five sorties because of inexperience, because they received the most-damaged and least-reliable planes, and because they were likely to be their formations charlies and thus most vulnerable. For the survivors, the odds of survival rose during the next 15 sorties as their skill and confidence grew. After 20, however, the odds again decreased to zero.(Korda 2010, p. 8687.)With aircraft production running at 300 each week, only 200 pilots were trained in the same period. In addition, more pilots were allocated to squadrons than there were aircraft, as this allowed squadrons to maintain operational strength despite casualties and still provide for pilot leave.(Bungay 2000, p. 370) Another factor was that only about 30% of the 9,000 pilots were assigned to operational squadrons; 20% of the pilots were involved in conducting pilot training, and a further 20% were undergoing further instruction, like those offered in Canada and in Rhodesia to the Commonwealth trainees, although already qualified. The rest were assigned to staff positions, since RAF policy dictated that only pilots could make many staff and operational command decisions, even in engineering matters. At the height of fighting, and despite Churchills insistence, only 30 pilots were released to the front line from administrative duties.(Ponting 1991, p. 130.)(The pilots occupying these administrative positions included such officers as Dowding, Park and Leigh-Mallory and the numbers actually fit to serve in front line fighter squadrons are open to question.)For these reasons, and the permanent loss of 435 pilots during Battle of France alone(A Short History of the Royal Air Force,p. 99. RAF. Reyrieved: 10 July 2011.) with many more wounded, and others lost in Norway, the RAF had fewer experienced pilots at the start of the battle, and it was the lack of trained pilots in the fighting squadrons, rather than the lack of aircraft, that became the greatest concern for Air Chief Marshal Dowding, Commander of Fighter Command. Drawing from regular RAF forces and the Auxiliary Air Force and the Volunteer Reserve, the British could muster some 1,103 fighter pilots on 1 July. Replacement pilots, with little flight training and often no gunnery training, suffered high casualty rates.(Bungay 2000, p. 260.)The Luftwaffe could muster a larger number (1,450) of more experienced fighter pilots.( Drawing from a cadre of Civil War veterans, they had comprehensive courses in aerial gunnery and instructions in tactics suited for fighter-versus-fighter combat.(Bungay 2000, p. 259.) Training manuals also discouraged heroism, stressing the utmost importance of attacking only when the odds were in the pilots favour. However, German fighter formations did not provide a sufficient reserve of pilots to allow for losses and leave,( and the Luftwaffe was unable to produce enough pilots to prevent a decline in operational strength as the battle progressed.International participationBoth sides received significant outside support during the battle.AlliesFile:Dywizjon 303 4.jpg|thumb|right|126 German aircraft or Adolfs were claimed by Polish pilots of Squadron during the Battle.The Royal Air Force roll of honour for the Battle of Britain recognises 595 non-British pilots (out of 2,936) as flying at least one authorised operational sortie with an eligible unit of the RAF or Air Arm between 10 July and 31 October 1940.(Ramsay 1989, pp. 757790.)(Battle of Britain Roll of Honour. RAF website, Ministry of Defence, 20 March 2006. Retrieved: 4 April 2007.) These included 145 Poles, 127 Zealanders, 112 Canadians, 88 Czechoslovaks, 32 Australians, 28 Belgians, 25 South Africans, 13 French, 10 Irish, 7 Americans, and one each from Jamaica, the Mandate of Palestine, and Rhodesia.(Participants in the Battle of Britain. bbm.org.uk. Retrieved: 28 June 2010.)AxisAn element of the Italian Royal Air Force (Aeronautica) called the Italian Air Corps (Corpo Aereo Italiano or CAI) first saw action in late October 1940. It took part in the latter stages of the battle, but achieved limited success. The unit was redeployed in early 1941.Luftwaffe strategyThe Luftwaffe was devised to provide tactical support for the army on the battlefield. During the blitzkrieg offensives against Poland, Denmark and Norway and France and the Countries, the Luftwaffe had co-operated fully with the Wehrmacht. For the Battle of Britain however, the Luftwaffe had to operate in a strategic role, something for which it was unsuited. Its main task was to ensure air supremacy over southeast England, to pave the way for an invasion fleet.The Luftwaffe regrouped after the Battle of France into three Luftflotten (Air Fleets) on Britains southern and northern flanks. Luftflotte 2, commanded by Generalfeldmarschall Kesselring, was responsible for the bombing of southeast England and the London area. Luftflotte 3, under Generalfeldmarschall Sperrle, targeted the Country, Wales, the Midlands, and northwest England. Luftflotte 5, led by Generaloberst Stumpff from his headquarters in Norway, targeted the north of England and Scotland. As the battle progressed, command responsibility shifted, with Luftflotte 3 taking more responsibility for the night-time Blitz attacks while the main daylight operations fell upon Luftflotte 2s shoulders.Initial Luftwaffe estimates were that it would take four days to defeat the RAF Fighter Command in southern England. This would be followed by a four-week offensive during which the bombers and long-range fighters would destroy all military installations throughout the country and wreck the British aircraft industry. The campaign was planned to begin with attacks on airfields near the coast, gradually moving inland to attack the ring of sector airfields defending London. Later reassessments gave the Luftwaffe five weeks, from 8 August to 15 September, to establish temporary air superiority over England.(Bungay 2000, p. 119.) To achieve this goal, Fighter Command had to be destroyed, either on the ground or in the air, yet the Luftwaffe had to be able to preserve its own strength to be able to support the invasion; this meant that the Luftwaffe had to maintain a high kill ratio over the RAF fighters. The only alternative to the goal of air superiority was a bombing campaign aimed at the civilian population, but this was considered a last resort and it was expressly forbidden by Hitler.(The Luftwaffe kept broadly to this scheme, but its commanders had differences of opinion on strategy. Sperrle wanted to eradicate the air defence infrastructure by bombing it. His counterpart, Kesselring, championed attacking London directlyeither to bombard the British government into submission or to draw RAF fighters into a decisive battle. Gring did nothing to resolve this disagreement between his commanders, and only vague directives were set down during the initial stages of the battle, with Gring seemingly unable to decide upon which strategy to pursue.(Bungay 2000, p. 122.) He seemed at times obsessed with maintaining his own power base in the Luftwaffe and indulging his out-dated beliefs on air fighting, which were later to lead to tactical and strategic errors.TacticsLuftwaffe tactics were influenced by their fighters. The Bf 110 proved too vulnerable to the nimble single-engined RAF fighters. This meant the bulk of fighter escort duties fell on the Bf 109. Fighter tactics were then complicated by bomber crews who demanded closer protection. After the hard-fought battles of 15 and 18 August, Gring met with his unit leaders. During this conference, the need for the fighters to meet up on time with the bombers was stressed.  It was also decided that one bomber Gruppe could only be properly protected by several Gruppen of 109s. In addition Gring stipulated that as many fighters as possible were to be left free for Freie Jagd (Free Hunts: a free-roving fighter sweep preceded a raid to try to sweep defenders out of the raids path). The Ju 87 units, which had suffered heavy casualties, were only to be used under favourable circumstances.(Bungay 2000, pp. 232233.) In early September, due to increasing complaints from the bomber crews about RAF fighters seemingly able to get through the escort screen, Gring ordered an increase in close escort duties. This decision shackled many of the Bf 109s to the bombers and, although they were more successful at protecting the bomber forces, casualties amongst the fighters mounted primarily because they were forced to fly and manoeuvre at reduced speeds.(Bungay 2000, p. 305.)The Luftwaffe consistently varied its tactics in its attempts to break through the RAF defences. It launched many Freie Jagd to draw up RAF fighters. RAF fighter controllers, however, were often able to detect these and position squadrons to avoid them, keeping to Dowdings plan to preserve fighter strength for the bomber formations.  The Luftwaffe also tried using small formations of bombers as bait, covering them with large numbers of escorts. This was more successful, but escort duty tied the fighters to the bombers slow speed and made them more vulnerable.By September, standard tactics for raids had become an amalgam of techniques.  A Freie Jagd would precede the main attack formations. The bombers would fly in at altitudes between  and , closely escorted by fighters. Escorts were divided into two parts (usually Gruppen), some operating in close contact with the bombers, and others a few hundred yards away and a little above. If the formation was attacked from the starboard, the starboard section engaged the attackers, the top section moving to starboard and the port section to the top position. If the attack came from the port side the system was reversed. British fighters coming from the rear were engaged by the rear section and the two outside sections similarly moving to the rear. If the threat came from above, the top section went into action while the side sections gained height to be able to follow RAF fighters down as they broke away. If attacked, all sections flew in defensive circles. These tactics were skilfully evolved and carried out, and were extremely difficult to counter.(Wood and Dempster 2003, p. 216.)File:Bundesarchiv Bild 146-2006-0123, Adolf Galland.jpg|thumb|upright|right|Adolf Galland, the successful leader of III./JG 26, became Geschwaderkommodore of 26 on 22 August.Galland noted:The biggest disadvantage faced by Bf 109 pilots was that without the benefit of long-range tanks (which were introduced in limited numbers in the late stages of the battle), usually of  capacity, the 109s had an endurance of just over an hour and, for the 109E, a 600 km (360 mi) range. Once over Britain, a 109 pilot had to keep an eye on a red low fuel light on the instrument panel: once this was illuminated, he was forced to turn back and head for France.  With the prospect of two long over-water flights, and knowing their range was substantially reduced when escorting bombers or during combat, the Jagdflieger coined the term Kanalkrankheit or Channel sickness.(Price 1980, pp. 1315.)IntelligenceThe Luftwaffe was ill-served by its lack of intelligence about the British defences.(Bungay 2000, p. 68.)  The German intelligence services were fractured and plagued by rivalries; their performance was amateurish.(Bungay 2000, pp. 6970.) By 1940, there were few German agents operating in Great Britain and a handful of bungled attempts to insert spies into the country were foiled.(Bungay 2000, p. 186.)As a result of intercepted radio transmissions, the Germans began to realise that the RAF fighters were being controlled from ground facilities; in July and August 1939, for example, the airship Graf Zeppelin, which was packed with equipment for listening in on RAF radio and RDF transmissions, flew around the coasts of Britain. Although the Luftwaffe correctly interpreted these new ground control procedures, they were incorrectly assessed as being rigid and ineffectual. A British radar system was well known to the Luftwaffe from intelligence gathered before the war, but the highly developed Dowding system linked with fighter control had been a well-kept secret.(Bungay 2000, pp. 6869.)( Lt Col Earle Lund, USAF, p. 13.  ProFTPd.  Retrieved 13 June 2008.)  Even when good information existed, such as a November 1939 Abwehr assessment of Fighter Command strengths and capabilities by Abteilung V, it was ignored if it did not match conventional preconceptions.On 16 July 1940, Abteilung V, commanded by Oberstleutnant Beppo Schmid, produced a report on the RAF and on Britains defensive capabilities which was adopted by the frontline commanders as a basis for their operational plans. One of the most conspicuous failures of the report was the lack of information on the RAFs RDF network and control systems capabilities; it was assumed that the system was rigid and inflexible, with the RAF fighters being tied to their home bases.(Bungay 2000, p. 188.)( Abteilung V Intelligence Appreciation of the RAF (see Appendix 4). ProFTPd. Retrieved 13 June 2008.) An optimistic and, as it turned out, erroneous conclusion reached was:Because of this statement, reinforced by another more detailed report, issued on 10 August, there was a mindset in the ranks of the Luftwaffe that the RAF would run out of frontline fighters.( The Luftwaffe believed it was weakening Fighter Command at three times the actual attrition rate.(Bungay 2000, p. 193.) Many times, the leadership believed Fighter Commands strength had collapsed, only to discover that the RAF were able to send up defensive formations at will.Throughout the battle, the Luftwaffe had to use numerous reconnaissance sorties to make up for the poor intelligence. Reconnaissance aircraft (initially mostly Dornier Do 17s, but increasingly Bf 110s) proved easy prey for British fighters, as it was seldom possible for them to be escorted by Bf 109s. Thus, the Luftwaffe operated blind for much of the battle, unsure of its enemys true strengths, capabilities, and deployments. Many of the Fighter Command airfields were never attacked, while raids against supposed fighter airfields fell instead on bomber or coastal defence stations. The results of bombing and air fighting were consistently exaggerated, due to over-enthusiastic claims and the difficulty of confirmation over enemy territory. In the euphoric atmosphere of perceived victory, the Luftwaffe leadership became increasingly disconnected from reality. This lack of leadership and solid intelligence meant the Germans did not adopt consistent strategy, even when the RAF had its back to the wall.  Moreover, there was never a systematic focus on one type of target (such as airbases, radar stations, or aircraft factories); consequently, the already haphazard effort was further diluted.(Allen 1974)Navigational aidsWhile the British were using radar for air defence more effectively than the Germans realised, the Luftwaffe attempted to press its own offensive advantage with advanced navigation systems of which the British were initially not aware. One of these was Knickebein (crooked leg); this system was used at night and for raids where precision was required. It was rarely used during the Battle of Britain (see Victor Jones and of the Beams).(Bungay 2000, p. 342.)Air-sea rescueThe Luftwaffe was much better prepared for the task of rescue than the RAF, specifically tasking the Seenotdienst unit, equipped with He 59 floatplanes, with picking up downed aircrew from the Sea, Channel and the Straits. In addition, Luftwaffe aircraft were equipped with life rafts and the aircrew were provided with sachets of a chemical called fluorescein which, on reacting with water, created a large, easy-to-see, bright green patch.(Orange 2001, p. 98.)In accordance with the Convention, the He 59s were unarmed and painted white with civilian registration markings and red crosses. Nevertheless, RAF aircraft attacked these aircraft, as some were escorted by Bf 109s.(Deere 1974, p. 89.)After single He 59s were forced to land on the sea by RAF fighters, on 1 and 9 July respectively,((Ramsay 1987, p. 113.) a controversial order was issued to the RAF on 13 July; this stated that as of 20 July, Seenotdienst aircraft were to be shot down. One of the reasons given by Churchill was:The Air Ministry issuing a communiqu to the German government on 14 July:The white He 59s were soon repainted in camouflage colours and armed with defensive machine guns. Although another four He 59s were shot down by RAF aircraft,(Ramsay 1989, pp. 602, 680.) the Seenotdienst continued to pick up downed Luftwaffe and Allied aircrew throughout the battle, earning praise from Adolf Galland for their gallantry.(Galland 2005, p. 33.)RAF strategyThe Dowding SystemThe keystone of the British defence was the complex infrastructure of detection, command, and control that ran the battle. This was the Dowding System, after its chief architect, Chief Marshal Sir H.C.T. Stuffy Dowding, and the leader of RAF Fighter Command. Much of the air defence system had been originally set up from 1917 by Major General E B Ashmore. Dowding built upon and modernised many of the features of this system,(Bungay 2000, pp. 62, 447 Note 23.) including the use of two-way radio and the Royal Observer Corps (ROC).(Duffy, Michael. Whos Who  Edward Ashmore. firstworldwar.com, 2 August 2009. Retrieved: 5 April 2010.) However, the core of Dowdings system was implemented by Dowding himself: the use of Radio Direction Finding (RDF, later called radar, for radio detection and ranging)(RADAR means: Radio Detection and Ranging. NASA, 14 October 20017. Retrieved: 12 September 2010.) was at his behest, and its use, supplemented by information by the ROC, was crucial to the RAFs ability to efficiently intercept incoming German aircraft.(Korda 2010, pp. 4143.) He also insisted on having the radar operators linked via telephone (whose wires were laid deep underground with concrete anti-bomb protection)(Korda 2010, pp. 4748.) to an operational centre: this was Fighter Command control at Bentley Priory.(Korda 2010, pp. 3536.) During the Battle several Command and Air Arm units came under Fighter Command control.GroupsThe British airspace was divided up into four Groups.*10 Group defended Wales and the Country and was commanded by Vice-Marshal Sir Brand.*11 Group covered the southeast of England and the critical approaches to London and was commanded by New Zealander Air Vice-Marshal Park from the No. 11 Group Fighter Command Operations Room in the underground bunker at Uxbridge, now known as the of Britain Bunker.*12 Group defended the Midlands and Anglia and was led by Air Vice-Marshal Leigh-Mallory.*13 Group covered the north of England, Scotland and Ireland and was commanded by Air Vice-Marshal Saul.Control systemsUsually the first indications of incoming air raids were received by the Home Radio Direction Finding (RDF) facilities which were located around the coastlines of Great Britain.  In most circumstances, RDF could pick up formations of Luftwaffe aircraft as they organised over their own airfields. Once the raiding aircraft moved inland over England, the formations were also plotted by the Observer Corps. The information from RDF and the Observer Corps were sent through to the main operations room of Fighter Command Headquarters at Bentley Priory. The plots were assessed to determine whether they were hostile or friendly. If hostile, the information was sent to the main operations room, which was in a large underground bunker.Here the course information of each raid was plotted by WAAFs who received information by a telephone system. Additional intelligence was provided by the Y Service radio posts, which monitored enemy radio transmissions, and the Ultra decoding centre based at Park. Colour coded counters representing each raid were placed on a large table, which had a map of Britain overlaid and squared off with a British Modified Grid. The colour of counter to use for a new sighting was determined by the time of the sighting, the proper colour being indicated by the minute hand of the clock. As the plots of the raiding aircraft moved, the counters were pushed across the map by magnetic rakes. This system enabled the main Fighter Controller (usually of squadron leader rank) and Dowding to see quickly where each formation was heading and allowed an estimate to be made of possible targets.  The age of the information was readily apparent from the colour of the counter.  Because of the simplicity of the system, decisions could be made quickly and easily.Apart from the controller, most of the room and map information was operated by members of the WAAF. Before the war, there was still a great deal of doubt about the ability of women to stand up to battle conditions, with many airwomen employed on front-line RDF stations and aerodromes.(Price 1980, p. 27.) Experience during the battle proved that such doubts were unfounded and the contribution of the WAAFs became essential to the RAF in its control and communications systems and in many other duties.(Reynolds, Katherine. Early Radar Memories: Sgt. Jean (Sally) Semple, one of Britains pioneer Radar Operators. Spitfire Site. Retrieved: 22 June 2008.)(Pugh, Cathy. WAAF Wartime experiences. War Experience. Retrieved: 22 June 2008.)(Younghusband, Eileen. One Womans War. Cardiff. Candy Jar Books. 2011. ISBN 978-0-9566826-2-8)This information was simultaneously sent to the headquarters of each Group (for example, Uxbridge for 11 Group),(Catford, Nick and Bob Jenner. Site Name: RAF Uxbridge  Battle of Britain Ops. Room. subbrit.org.uk, 2001. Retrieved: 28 May 2008.) where it was filtered through a filter room (that is, collated, cross-checked and simplified), before being sent through to another operations room, housed in the of Britain Bunker. Because Group had tactical control of the battle the operations room was different in layout from the one at Bentley Priory. The main map on the plotting table represented the Group command area and its associated airfields. Extensive radio and telephone equipment transmitted and received a constant flow of information from the various sector airfields as well as the Observer Corps, AA Command and the navy. The Duty fighter controller was (for example in 11 Group) Parks personal representative, whose job was to control how and when each raid would be dealt with. He ordered the squadrons airborne and positioned them as he thought best. Timing was of the essence, because (e)ach minute of unnecessary delay waiting to make absolutely sure that the raid was coming in meant about 2,000 feet of vital altitude our fighters would not have when they met the enemy. (Wing Commander Lord Willoughby de Broke, Senior Fighter Controller, Uxbridge.)Each Group room had a tote board which showed each squadron available to that group. The tote board had a system of lights which enabled the controllers to see the squadron status: Released (not available); Available (airborne in 20 minutes); Readiness (airborne in 5 minutes); Standby (pilots in cockpit, airborne in 2 minutes); Airborne and moving into position; Enemy sighted; Ordered to land; Landed and refuelling/rearming. Next to the tote board, where it could be clearly seen, was a weather board which showed the state of the weather around each airfield. It was the responsibility of the WAAF plotters to continually update the tote and weather boards.(Price, 1980, pp. 2227.)(Ramsay 1989, pp. 1428.)A vital role was played by the telephone engineers of the GPO who worked all hours repairing communications, installing completely new facilities in the emergency centres, and keeping the nervous system of Fighter Command functioning... (Air Commodore Eric Roberts, Commander Middle Wallop Sector in 1940)(Ramsay 1989, p. 26.)Despite appearances, the Groups were not mutually supporting; Park, for instance, could only request  not demand  assistance from Brand (who usually co-operated), or from Leigh-Mallory (who often prevaricated). This was because Dowding had never issued standing orders to assist, nor had he created a method to co-ordinate it.(There was a further problem in that the aircraft were not assigned equitably between Groups. While the most effective RAF fighter was the Spitfire, 70% of 11 Group aircraft were Hurricanes. In total, less than a third of Britains best fighters were operating in the key sector.(Ponting 1991, p. 131.)Sectorsof Britain Operations Room, RAF Duxford.jpg|thumb|RIGHT|The restored 12 Group Sector operations room at Duxford.The Group areas were subdivided into Sectors; each commanding officer was assigned between two and four squadrons. Sector Stations, comprising an aerodrome with a Sector operations room, were the heart of this organisation, and they were also responsible for operating satellite aerodromes to which squadrons could be dispersed. The operations rooms duplicated those at the Group HQs, although they were on a smaller scale and most were still housed in brick, single-storey, tile-roofed structures above ground, where they were vulnerable to attack. By 1940, most were semi-protected by an earth bank or blast wall surrounding them which reached as high as the eaves. Fortunately for Fighter Command, Luftwaffe Intelligence was unaware of the importance of these rooms and most were left alone. The control rooms at Biggin Hill were destroyed by a raid on 31 August, but this was due to a chance bomb hit. Their vulnerability in time of war was appreciated and new airfields built during the expansion programme of the 1930s had new, bombproof Mk II, L-shaped structures. As a further precaution, emergency control rooms were set up in different locations away from the airfields, with small loss in efficiency; Kenley, for example, could use an alternative room housed in a butchers shop in nearby Caterham. The plotting table was laid out with a map of the sector and its airfields, and the tote and weather boards reflected this more localised information.(When ordered by their Group HQ, the sector stations would scramble their squadrons into the air. Once airborne, the squadrons would be directed by radio-telephone (R/T) from their sector station. Squadrons could be ordered to patrol airfields or vital targets or be vectored to intercept incoming raids. As well as directing the fighter squadrons, Sector stations also controlled the anti-aircraft batteries in their area; an army officer sat beside each fighter controller and directed the gun crews when to open fire and, if RAF aircraft flew into the gun-zones, ordered the guns to cease fire.(Price 1980, p. 26.)LimitationsThough it was the most sophisticated air defence system in the world at that time, the Dowding System had many limitations, including, but not often stressed, its emphatic need for qualified ground maintenance personnel, many of whom had received their training under the Apprentice scheme instituted by Trenchard. RDF (radar) was subject to significant errors and the Observer Corps had difficulties tracking raids at night and in bad weather. R/T (radio telephone) communications with airborne fighters were restricted because the standard radio set used by RAF fighters at the beginning of the battle was the TR9D HF set, which operated over two selectable frequencies in the band 4.36.6 Megahertz (MHz);(Pope 1995, pp. 6365.) the RAF soon realised that this equipment was limited in the range at which it could receive and transmit radio signals because of its limited power. In addition, the increase in the number of civil, military and foreign HF-band radio transmitters since the adoption of the TR9 meant that the signal often suffered from distortion and interference, making clear communication with the RAF fighters difficult. It was also restricted to a single frequency per squadron, making inter-squadron communication impossible.( Finally, the system for tracking RAF fighters, known as HF/DF or Huff-Duff, restricted sectors to a maximum of four squadrons in the air. The addition of IFF, Pipsqueak, while a welcome help in identifying RAF aircraft, took up another radio channel.In late September 1940, VHF T/R Type 1133 radios started replacing the TR9s. These had first been fitted to Spitfires of 54 and 66 Squadrons starting in October 1939,( but production delays with the improved T/R 1143 set meant the bulk of Spitfires and Hurricanes were not fitted with this equipment until October 1940. The reception was much clearer over a longer range, and controllers and pilots had a wider range of communications channels to choose from.((Effect of signals intelligenceIt is unclear how much the British intercepts of the cipher, used for high-security German radio communications, affected the battle. Ultra, the information obtained from Enigma intercepts, gave the highest echelons of the British command a view of German intentions.  According to W. Winterbotham, who was the senior Air Staff representative in the Secret Intelligence Service,(Winterbotham 1975, p. 13.) Ultra helped establish the strength and composition of the Luftwaffes formations, the aims of the commanders(Winterbotham 1975, pp. 6163.) and provided early warning of some raids.(Winterbotham 1975, pp. 6869.) In early August it was decided that a small unit would be set up at Fighter Command headquarters (Stanmore), which would process the flow of information from Bletchley and provide Dowding only with the most essential Ultra material; thus the Air Ministry did not have to send a continual flow of information to Stanmore, preserving secrecy, and Dowding was not inundated with non-essential information. Keith Park and his controllers were also told about Ultra.(Winterbotham 1975, p. 65.) In a further attempt to camouflage the existence of Ultra Dowding created a unit called 421 Flight. This unit (which later became 91 Squadron), was equipped with Hurricanes and Spitfires and sent out aircraft to search for and report Luftwaffe formations approaching England.(Ramsay 1989, p. 5.) In addition the radio listening service (known as Y Service), monitoring the patterns of Luftwaffe radio traffic, contributed considerably to the early warning of raids.Air-sea rescueOne of the biggest oversights of the entire system was the lack of a proper air-sea rescue organisation. The RAF had started organising a system in 1940 with High Speed Launches (HSLs) based on flying boat bases and at a number of overseas locations, but it was still believed that the amount of cross-Channel traffic meant that there was no need for a rescue service to cover these areas. Downed pilots and aircrew, it was hoped, would be picked up by any boats or ships which happened to be passing by. Otherwise the local life boat would be alerted, assuming someone had seen the pilot going into the water.(RAF History: Air/Sea Search and Rescue  60th Anniversary.  UK: RAF. Retrieved: 24 May 2008.)RAF aircrew were issued with a life jacket, nicknamed the Mae West but in 1940 it still required manual inflation, which was almost impossible for someone who was injured or in shock. The waters of the Channel and Straits are cold, even in the middle of summer, and clothing issued to RAF aircrew did little to insulate them against these freezing conditions. A conference in 1939 had placed air-sea rescue under Coastal Command.  Because a number of pilots had been lost at sea during the Channel Battle, on 22 August, control of RAF rescue launches was passed to the local naval authorities and 12 Lysanders were given to Fighter Command to help look for pilots at sea. In all some 200 pilots and aircrew were lost at sea during the battle. No proper air-sea rescue service was formed until 1941.(Tacticsa late production Mk I Spitfire of 19 Squadron, September 1940. 19 Squadron was part of the Duxford Wing.The weight of the battle fell upon 11 Group. Keith Parks tactics were to dispatch individual squadrons to intercept raids. The intention was to subject incoming bombers to continual attacks by relatively small numbers of fighters and try to break up the tight German formations. Once formations had fallen apart, stragglers could be picked off one by one. Where multiple squadrons reached a raid the procedure was for the slower Hurricanes to tackle the bombers while the more agile Spitfires held up the fighter escort. This ideal was not always achieved, resulting in occasions when Spitfires and Hurricanes reversed roles.(Orange 2001, pp. 96, 100.) Park also issued instructions to his units to engage in frontal attacks against the bombers, which were more vulnerable to such attacks. Again, in the environment of fast moving, three-dimensional air battles, few RAF fighter units were able to attack the bombers from head-on.(During the battle, some commanders, notably Leigh-Mallory, proposed squadrons be formed into Wings, consisting of at least three squadrons, to attack the enemy en masse, a method pioneered by Bader.Bader.jpg|thumb|upright|left|Douglas Bader commanded 242 Squadron during the battle. He also led the Duxford Wing.Proponents of this tactic claimed interceptions in large numbers caused greater enemy losses while reducing their own casualties. Opponents pointed out the big wings would take too long to form up, and the strategy ran a greater risk of fighters being caught on the ground refuelling. The big wing idea also caused pilots to over-claim their kills, due to the confusion of a more intense battle zone.  This led to the belief big wings were far more effective than they were.(Bungay 2000, pp. 276277, 309310, 313314, 320321, 329330, 331.)The issue caused intense friction between Park and Leigh-Mallory, as 12 Group was tasked with protecting 11 Groups airfields whilst Parks squadrons intercepted incoming raids. However, the delay in forming up Big Wings meant the formations often did not arrive at all or until after German bombers had hit 11 Groups airfields.(Bungay 2000, p. 356.) Dowding, to highlight the problem of the Big Wings performance, submitted a report compiled by Park to the Air Ministry on 15 November. In the report, he highlighted that during the period of 11 September  31 October, the extensive use of the Big Wing had resulted in just 10 interceptions and one German aircraft destroyed, but his report was ignored.(Bungay 2000, p. 359.) Post-war analysis agrees Dowding and Parks approach was best for 11 Group.Dowdings removal from his post in November 1940 has been blamed on this struggle between Park and Leigh-Mallorys daylight strategy.  However, the intensive raids and destruction wrought during the Blitz damaged both Dowding and Park in particular, for the failure to produce an effective night-fighter defence system, something for which the influential Leigh-Mallory had long criticised them.(Bungay 2000, p. 354.)Bomber and Coastal Command contributionsBristol Blenheim Mk IV of 21 Squadron. The Blenheim bomber units of Bomber and Coastal Commands bore heavy casualties while undertaking a number of tasks during the Battle.Bomber Command and Coastal Command aircraft flew offensive sorties against targets in Germany and France during the battle.  After the initial disasters of the war, with Wellington bombers shot down in large numbers attacking Wilhelmshaven and the slaughter of the Battle squadrons sent to France, it became clear that Bomber Command would have to operate mainly at night to achieve any results without incurring very high losses.(Bungay 2000, p. 90.) From 15 May 1940, a night time bomber campaign was launched against the German oil industry, communications, and forests/crops, mainly in the Ruhr area.As the threat mounted, Bomber Command changed targeting priority on 3 June 1940 to attack the German aircraft industry.  On 4 July, the Air Ministry gave Bomber Command orders to attack ports and shipping. By September, the build-up of invasion barges in the Channel ports had become a top priority target.(  On 7 September, the government issued a warning that the invasion could be expected within the next few days and, that night, Bomber Command attacked the Channel ports and supply dumps.  On 13 September, they carried out another large raid on the Channel ports, sinking 80 large barges in the port of Ostend.( 84 barges were sunk in Dunkirk after another raid on 17 September and by 19 September, almost 200 barges had been sunk.( The loss of these barges may have contributed to Hitlers decision to postpone Operation Sealion indefinitely.(Halpenny 1984, pp. 89.) The success of these raids was in part because the Germans had few radar stations set up in France, so that air defences of the French harbours were not nearly as good as the air defences over Germany; Bomber Command had directed some 60% of its strength against the Channel ports.The Blenheim units also raided German-occupied airfields throughout July to December 1940, both during daylight hours and at night. Although most of these raids were unproductive, there were some successes; on 1 August, five out of 12 Blenheims sent to attack Haamstede and Evere (Brussels) were able to bomb, destroying or heavily damaging three Bf 109s of II./JG 27 and apparently killing a Staffelkapitn identified as a Hauptmann Albrecht von Ankum-Frank. Two other 109s were claimed by Blenheim gunners.(Ramsay 1989, p. 552.) Another successful raid on Haamstede was made by a single Blenheim on 7 August which destroyed one 109 of 4./JG 54, heavily damaged another and caused lighter damage to four more.(Warner 2005, p. 253.)There were some missions which produced an almost 100% casualty rate amongst the Blenheims; one such operation was mounted on 13 August 1940 against a Luftwaffe airfield near Aalborg in north-eastern Denmark by 12 aircraft of 82 Squadron. One Blenheim returned early (the pilot was later charged and due to appear before a court martial, but was killed on another operation), the other 11, which reached Denmark, were shot down, five by flak and six by Bf 109s.  Of the 33 crewmen who took part in the attack, 20 were killed and 13 captured.(Warner 2005, pp. 255, 266.)As well as the bombing operations, Blenheim-equipped units had been formed to carry out long-range strategic reconnaissance missions over Germany and German-occupied territories. In this role, the Blenheims again proved to be too slow and vulnerable against Luftwaffe fighters, and they took constant casualties.(Warner 2005)Coastal Command directed its attention towards the protection of British shipping, and the destruction of enemy shipping.  As invasion became more likely, it participated in the strikes on French harbours and airfields, laying mines, and mounting numerous reconnaissance missions over the enemy-held coast. In all, some 9,180 sorties were flown by bombers from July to October 1940. Although this was much less than the 80,000 sorties flown by fighters, bomber crews suffered about half the total number of casualties borne by their fighter colleagues.  The bomber contribution was, therefore, much more dangerous on a loss-per-sortie comparison.(Bungay 2000, p. 92.)It is a testament to the courage of the men in these bomber, reconnaissance and Coastal Command units that they continued to operate throughout these months with little respite and with little of the publicity accorded to Fighter Command. In his famous 20 August speech about Few, praising Fighter Command, Churchill also made a point to mention Bomber Commands contribution, adding that bombers were even then striking back at Germany; this part of the speech is often overlooked.(Bungay 2000, p. 237.)(Speech of 20 August 1940.  Winston Churchill.  Retrieved 16 April 2008.)  The of Britain Chapel in Abbey lists in a Roll of Honour 718 Bomber Command crew members, and 280 from Coastal Command who were killed between 10 July and 31 October.(Warner 2005, p. 251.)Phases of the battleThe Battle can be roughly divided into four phases:*10 July  11 August: Kanalkampf, (the Channel battles).*12 August  23 August: Adlerangriff (Eagle Attack), the early assault against the coastal airfields.*24 August  6 September: the Luftwaffe targets the airfields. The critical phase of the battle.*7 September onwards: the day attacks switch to British towns and cities.Channel battlesFile:Boulton Paul Defiant.jpg|thumb|left|A pair of 264 Squadron Defiants (PS-V was shot down on 28 August 1940 over Kent by Bf 109s.)The Kanalkampf comprised a series of running fights over convoys in the English Channel and occasional attacks on the convoys by Stuka bombers. It was launched partly because Kesselring and Sperrle were not sure about what else to do, and partly because it gave German aircrews some training and a chance to probe the British defences.( These battles off the coast tended to favour the Germans, whose bomber escorts massively outnumbered the convoy patrols.  The need for constant patrols over the convoys put a severe strain on RAF pilots and machines. It cost fuel and engine hours and exhausted pilots. Eventually, ship losses became so great the British Admiralty cancelled all further convoys through the Channel. However, these early combat encounters provided both sides with experience. They also gave the first indications some aircraft, such as the Defiant and Bf 110, were not up to the intense dog-fighting that would characterise the battle.Main assaultThe main attack upon the RAFs defences was code-named Adlerangriff (Eagle Attack).Poor weather delayed Adlertag (Eagle Day) until 13 August 1940. On 12 August, the first attempt was made to blind the Dowding system, when aircraft from the specialist fighter-bomber unit Erprobungsgruppe 210 attacked four radar stations. Three were briefly taken off the air but were back working within six hours.(Bungay 2000, pp. 203205.)  The raids appeared to show that British radars were difficult to knock out. The failure to mount follow-up attacks allowed the RAF to get the stations back on the air, and the Luftwaffe neglected strikes on the supporting infrastructure, such as phone lines and power stations, which could have rendered the radars useless, even if the towers themselves (which were very difficult to destroy) remained intact.(Adlertag opened with a series of attacks, led again by Epro 210,( on coastal airfields used as forward landing grounds for the RAF fighters, as well as satellite airfields(Satellite airfields were mostly fully equipped but did not have the sector control room which allowed Sector airfields such as Biggin Hill to monitor and control RAF fighter formations. RAF units from Sector airfields often flew into a satellite airfield for operations during the day, returning to their home airfield in the evenings.) (including Manston and Hawkinge).( As the week drew on, the airfield attacks moved further inland, and repeated raids were made on the radar chain. 15 August was The Greatest Day when the Luftwaffe mounted the largest number of sorties of the campaign. Luftflotte 5 attacked the north of England.  Believing Fighter Command strength to be concentrated in the south, raiding forces from Denmark and Norway ran into unexpectedly strong resistance. Inadequately escorted by Bf 110s, bombers were shot down in large numbers. North East England was attacked by 65 Heinkel 111s escorted by 34 Messerschmitt 110s, and RAF Great Driffield was attacked by 50 unescorted Junkers 88s. Out of 115 bombers and 35 fighters sent, 16 bombers and 7 fighters were destroyed.(Document 32, Battle of Britain Historical Society.) As a result of these casualties, Luftflotte 5 did not appear in strength again in the campaign.18 August, which had the greatest number of casualties to both sides, has been dubbed Hardest Day. Following the grinding battles of 18 August, exhaustion and the weather reduced operations for most of a week, allowing the Luftwaffe to review their performance. The Hardest Day had sounded the end for the Ju 87 in the campaign.(Price 1980, p. 179.) This veteran of Blitzkrieg was too vulnerable to fighters to operate over Britain, and to preserve the Stuka force, Gring withdrew them from the fighting. This removed the main Luftwaffe precision-bombing weapon and shifted the burden of pinpoint attacks on the already-stretched Erpro 210. The Bf 110 proved too clumsy for dogfighting with single-engined fighters, and its participation was scaled back. It would only be used when range required it or when sufficient single-engined escort could not be provided for the bombers.Gring made yet another fateful decision: to order more bomber escorts at the expense of free-hunting sweeps. To achieve this, the weight of the attack now fell on Luftflotte 2, and the bulk of the Bf 109s in 3 were transferred to Kesselrings command, reinforcing the fighter bases in the Pas-de-Calais. Stripped of its fighters, Luftflotte 3 would concentrate on the night bombing campaign. Gring, expressing disappointment with the fighter performance thus far in the campaign, also made sweeping changes in the command structure of the fighter units, replacing many Geschwaderkommodore with younger, more aggressive pilots like Adolf Galland and Mlders.(Deighton 1996, p. 182.)Finally, Gring stopped the attacks on the radar chain. These were seen as unsuccessful, and neither the Reichsmarschall nor his subordinates realised how vital the Chain Home stations were to the defence. It was known that radar provided some early warning of raids, but the belief among German fighter pilots was that anything bringing up the Tommies to fight was to be encouraged.The Luftwaffe targets RAF airfieldsBattleFile:Piloci 303.jpg|thumb|right|Polish squadron pilots, 1940. Left to right: P/O Feri, Flt Lt Kent, F/O Grzeszczak, P/O Radomski, P/O Zumbach, P/O okuciewski, F/O Henneberg, Sgt. Rogowski, Sgt. Szaposznikow.Gring ordered attacks on aircraft factories on 19 August 1940; on 23 August 1940 he ordered that RAF airfields be attacked. That evening an attack was mounted on a tyre factory in Birmingham. Raids on airfields continued through 24 August, and Portsmouth was hit by a major attack. That night, several areas of London were bombed; the East End was set ablaze and bombs landed on central London. Some historians believe that these bombs were dropped accidentally by a group of He 111s which had failed to find their target; this account has been contested.( In retaliation, the RAF bombed Berlin on the night of 2526 August, and continued bombing raids on Berlin. Grings pride was hurt, as he had previously claimed the British would never be able to bomb the city. The attacks enraged Hitler, who ordered retaliatory attacks on London.(From 24 August onwards, the battle was a fight between Kesselrings Luftflotte 2 and Parks 11 Group. The Luftwaffe concentrated all their strength on knocking out Fighter Command and made repeated attacks on the airfields. Of the 33 heavy attacks in the following two weeks, 24 were against airfields. The key sector stations were hit repeatedly: Biggin Hill and Hornchurch four times each; Debden and North Weald twice each. Croydon, Gravesend, Rochford, Hawkinge and Manston were also attacked in strength. Commands Eastchurch was bombed at least seven times because it was believed to be a Fighter Command aerodrome. At times these raids caused some damage to the sector stations, threatening the integrity of the Dowding system.To offset some losses, some 58 Fleet Air Arm fighter pilot volunteers were seconded to RAF squadrons, and a similar number of former Fairey Battle pilots were used. Most replacements from Operational Training Units (OTUs) had as little as nine hours flying time and no gunnery or air-to-air combat training. At this point, the multinational nature of Fighter Command came to the fore. Many squadrons and personnel from the air forces of the Dominions were already attached to the RAF, including top level commanders  Australians, Canadians, New Zealanders, Rhodesians and South Africans. In addition, there were other nationalities represented, including Free French, Belgian and a Jewish pilot from the mandate of Palestine.They were bolstered by the arrival of fresh Czechoslovak and Polish squadrons. These had been held back by Dowding, who mistakenly thought non-English speaking aircrew would have trouble working within his control system. However, Polish and Czech fliers proved to be especially effective. The pre-war Air Force had lengthy and extensive training, and high standards; with Poland conquered and under brutal German occupation, the pilots of No. 303 (Polish) Squadron, the highest-scoring Allied unit,(Zaloga and Hook 1982, p. 15.) were strongly motivated. Frantiek, a Czech regular airman who had flown from the occupation of his own country to join the Polish and then French air forces before arriving in Britain, flew as a guest of 303 Squadron and was ultimately credited with the highest RAF score in the Battle of Britain.(Deighton 1996, pp. 188, 275.)The RAF had the advantage of fighting over home territory. Pilots who bailed out of their downed aircraft could be back at their airfields within hours. For Luftwaffe aircrews, a bailout over England meant capture, while parachuting into the English Channel often meant drowning or death from exposure. Morale began to suffer, and Kanalkrankheit (Channel sickness)  a form of combat fatigue  began to appear among the German pilots. Their replacement problem was even worse than the British.Impact of offensiveThe effect of the German attacks on airfields is not straightforward. Bungays research tells us that Dowding, in a letter to Trenchard(the PRO, AIR 19/60.) accompanying Parks report on the period 8 August  10 September 1940, states that the Luftwaffe achieved very little in the last week of August and the first week of September.(Bungay 2000, pp. 368369.) The only Sector Station to be shut down operationally was Biggin Hill, and it was non-operational for just two hours. Dowding admitted 11 Groups efficiency was impaired but, despite serious damage to some airfields, only two out of 13 heavily attacked airfields were down for more than a few hours. The German refocus on London was not critical.(Air Vice Marshal Peter Dye, head of the RAF Museum, discussed the logistics of the battle in 2000(Dye 2000, pp. 1, 3140.) and 2010,(Dye, Air Vice Marshal Peter. Aeroplane, Issue July 2010, p. 33.) dealing specifically with the single-seat fighters. Dye contends that not only was British aircraft production replacing aircraft, but replacement pilots were keeping pace with losses. The number of pilots in RAF Fighter Command increased during July, August and September. The figures indicate the number of pilots available never decreased.  From July, 1200 were available. In 1 August, 1400 were available. Just over that number were in the field by September. In October the figure was nearly 1,600. By 1 November 1800 were available. Throughout the battle, the RAF had more fighter pilots available than the Luftwaffe.((  Although the RAFs reserves of single seat fighters fell during July, the wastage was made up for by an efficient Repair Organisation (CRO), which by December had repaired and put back into service some 4,955 aircraft,(Dye 2000, p. 33.) and by aircraft held at Air Servicing Unit (ASU) airfields.(Dye 2000, pp. 33, 37.)Overy endorses Dye and Bungay. Overy asserts only one airfield was temporarily put out of action and only 103 pilots were lost. British fighter production produced 496 new aircraft in July and 467 in August, and another 467 in September (not counting repaired aircraft), covering the losses of August and September. Overy indicates the number of serviceable and total strength returns reveal an increase in fighters from 3 August to 7 September, 1,061 on strength and 708 serviceable to 1,161 on strength and 746 serviceable.(Overy 1980, pp. 3233.) Moreover, Overy points out that the number of RAF fighter pilots grew by one-third between June and August 1940. Personnel records show a constant supply of around 1,400 pilots in the crucial weeks of the battle. In the second half of September it reached 1,500. The shortfall of pilots was never above 10 percent.  The Germans never had more than between 1,100 and 1,200 pilots, a deficiency of up to one-third.  If Fighter Command were the few, the German fighter pilots were fewer.(Overy 2010, p. 38.)American historian Corum points out that it was unlikely that the Luftwaffe was ever able to destroy the RAF. If British losses became severe, the RAF could simply withdraw northward and regroup. It could then deploy when and if the Germans launched an invasion.  Corum doubts that the Luftwaffe could have defeated the RAF in the limited time available before the weather window closed in October.  Corum also argues that the Sea Lion would have failed because of the weaknesses of German sea power.(Corum 1997, pp. 283284.)Older history books assert this period was the most dangerous of all. In The Narrow Margin, published in 1961, historians Derek Wood and Derek Dempster believed that the period from 24 August to 6 September represented a real danger. According to them, from 24 August to 6 September 295 fighters had been totally destroyed and 171 badly damaged, against a total output of 269 new and repaired Spitfires and Hurricanes. They assert that 103 pilots were killed or missing and 128 were wounded, which represented a total wastage of 120 pilots per week out of a fighting strength of just fewer than 1,000. They conclude that during August no more than 260 fighter pilots were turned out by OTUs and casualties in the same month were just over 300. A full squadron establishment was 26 pilots whereas the average in August was 16. In their assessment, the RAF was losing the battle.(Wood and Dempster 2003, pp. 212213.)By this point Hitler had becoming impatient with the Luftwaffe. On 14 September, General Hans Jeschonnek, Luftwaffe Chief of Staff, persuaded Hitler for a last chance to defeat the RAF and sought permission to launch attacks on civilian residential areas to cause mass panic. Hitler refused the latter, perhaps unaware of just how much damage had already been done to civilian targets, as he wanted to reserve for himself the right to unleash the terror weapon. Political will was to be broken by the collapse of the material infrastructure, the weapons industry, along with the destruction of stocks of fuel and food. On 16 September, Gring ordered the air fleets to begin the new phase of the battle.(Overy 2001, p. 98.)Raids on British citiesHitlers No. 17 Directive, issued 1 August 1940 on the conduct of war against England specifically prohibited Luftwaffe from conducting terror raids on its own initiative, and reserved the right of ordering terror attacks as means of reprisal for the Fhrer himself:(Wood and Dempster 2003, p. 122.)The Luftwaffe offensive against Britain had included numerous raids on major ports since August, but Hitler had issued a directive London was not to be bombed save on his sole instruction.(Korda 2010, p. 198.) However, on the afternoon of 15 August, Hauptmann Walter Rubensdrffer leading Erprobungsgruppe 210 mistakenly bombed the Croydon airfield (on the outskirts of London) instead of the intended target, RAF Kenley;(Korda 2010, pp. 197198.) this was followed on the night of 23/24 August(Taylor and Mayer 1974, p. 74.) by the accidental bombing of Harrow, also on the outskirts of London, as well as raids on Aberdeen, Bristol, and Wales. The focus on attacking airfields had also been accompanied by a sustained bombing campaign which begun on 24 August with the largest raid so far, killing 100 in Portsmouth, and that evening the first night raid on London as described above.(Putland, Alan L. 19 August  24 August 1940. Battle of Britain Historical Society. Retrieved 12 August 2009.) On 25 August 1940, 81 bombers of Bomber Command were sent out to raid industrial and commercial targets in Berlin. Clouds prevented accurate identification and the bombs fell across the city, causing some casualties amongst the civilian population as well as damage to residential areas.(Wood and Dempster 2003, p. 193.) Continuing RAF raids on Berlin in retaliation led to Hitler withdrawing his directive,(Bungay 2000, p. 306.) and on 3 September Gring planned to bomb London daily, with Kesselrings enthusiastic support, having received reports the average strength of RAF squadrons was down to five or seven fighters out of 12 and their airfields in the area were out of action. Hitler issued a directive on 5 September to attack cities including London.(Irving 1974, p. 117 Note: OKW War diary, 69 September 1940.)(Hough and Richards 2007, p. 245.)  In his speech delivered on 4 September 1940, Hitler threatened to obliterate (ausradieren) British cities if British bombing runs against Germany did not stop.On 7 September, a massive series of raids involving nearly four hundred bombers and more than six hundred fighters targeted docks in the East End of London, day and night. The raids were codenamed Operation Loge. The RAF anticipated attacks on airfields and 11 Group rose to meet them, in greater numbers than the Luftwaffe expected. The first official deployment of 12 Groups Big Wing took twenty minutes to gain formation, missing its intended target, but encountering another formation of bombers while still climbing. They returned, apologetic about their limited success, and blamed the delay on being requested too late.(Putland, Alan L. 7 September 1940.  Battle of Britain Historical Society. Retrieved 12 August 2009.)(Putland, Alan L. 7 September 1940  The Aftermath.  Battle of Britain Historical Society. Retrieved 12 August 2009.) Fighter Command had been at its lowest ebb, short of men and machines, and the break from airfield attacks allowed them to recover. 11 Group had considerable success in breaking up daytime raids. 12 Group repeatedly disobeyed orders and failed to meet requests to protect 11 Group airfields, but their experiments with increasingly large Big Wings had some successes. The Luftwaffe began to abandon their morning raids, with attacks on London starting late in the afternoon for 57 consecutive nights of attacks.(Putland, Alan L. 8 September  9 September 1940. Battle of Britain Historical Society. Retrieved 12 August 2009.)The most damaging aspect to the Luftwaffe of the change in targets (to London) was the increase in range. The Bf 109 escorts had a limited fuel capacity, and by the time they arrived had only 10 minutes of flying time before they had to turn for home. This left many raids undefended by fighter escorts.On 14 September Hitler chaired a meeting with the OKW staff. Gring was absent in France, as he had decided to direct the decisive part of the battle from there, and left Milch to deputise for him.(Irving 1974, p. 117.)  At the meeting Hitler raised the question, Should we call it off altogether?. Hitler had accepted that an invasion with massive air cover was no longer possible. Instead he opted to try to crush British morale, while maintaining the threat of invasion. Hitler concluded this might result in eight million going mad (referring to the population of London in 1940), which would cause a catastrophe for the British. In those circumstances, Hitler said, even a small invasion might go a long way. At this point Hitler was against cancelling the invasion as the cancellation would reach the ears of the enemy and strengthen his resolve.On 15 September two massive waves of German attacks were decisively repulsed by the RAF, with every aircraft of 11 Group being used on that day. The total casualties on this critical day were 60 German and 26 RAF aircraft shot down. The German defeat caused Hitler to order, two days later, the postponement of preparations for the invasion of Britain.  Henceforth, in the face of mounting losses in men, aircraft and the lack of adequate replacements, the Luftwaffe switched from daylight to nighttime bombing. The air battles on 15 September became known as the of Britain Day.On 27 September, a Junkers Ju 88 returning from a raid on London was shot down in Kent, resulting in the of Graveney Marsh, the last action between British and foreign military forces on British mainland soil.(Green, Ron and Mark Harrison. Forgotten frontline exhibition tells how Luftwaffe fought with soldiers on Kent marshes. Kent Online, 30 September 2009. Retrieved 21 August 2010.)On 13 October, Hitler again postponed the invasion until the spring of 1941; however, the invasion never happened, and October is regarded as the month regular bombing of Britain ended.( It was not until Hitlers Directive 21 was issued, on 18 December 1940, that the threat of invasion finally dissipated.(During the battle, and for the rest of the war, an important factor in keeping public morale high was the continued presence in London of King George VI and his wife Queen Elizabeth. When war broke out in 1939, the King and Queen decided to stay in London and not flee to Canada, as had been suggested.(This proposal has since been confused, or conflated, with a possible flight by HMG in exile.) George VI and Elizabeth officially stayed in Palace throughout the war, although they often spent weekends at Castle to visit their daughters, Elizabeth (the future queen) and Margaret.(George VI and Elizabeth during the war years. UK: Royal government. Retrieved 30 June 2008.) Buckingham Palace was damaged by bombs which landed in the grounds on 10 September, and on 13 September, more serious damage was caused by two bombs which destroyed the Royal Chapel. The royal couple were in a small sitting room about 80 yards from where the bombs exploded.(Ramsay and Winston 1988, p. 90.)(Churchill 1949, p. 334.) On 24 September, in recognition of the bravery of civilians, King George VI inaugurated the award of the Cross.Attrition statisticsOverall, by 2 November, the RAF fielded 1,796 pilots, an increase of over 40% from July 1940s count of 1,259 pilots.(Dye 2000, p. 35.) Based on German sources (from a Luftwaffe intelligence officer Otto Bechtle attached to 2 in February 1944) translated by the Historical Branch, Stephen Bungay asserts German fighter and bomber strength declined without recovery, and that from August  December 1940, the German fighter and bomber strength declined by 30 and 25 percent.( In contrast, Williamson Murray, asserts (using translations by the Air Historical Branch) that 1,380 German bombers were on strength on 29 June 1940,((Murray 1983, p. 53.) 1,420 bombers on 28 September,(Murray 1983, p. 56.) 1,423 level bombers on 2 November(Murray 1983, p. 55.) and 1,393 bombers on 30 November 1940.( In July  September the number of Luftwaffe pilots available fell by 136, but the number of operational pilots had shrunk by 171 by September. The training organisation of the Luftwaffe was failing to replace losses. German fighter pilots, in contrast to popular perception, were not afforded training or rest rotations unlike their British counterparts.(Bungay 2000, p. 370.) The first week of September accounted for 25 per cent of the Fighter Command, and 24 per cent of the Luftwaffes overall losses.(Bungay 2000, p. 371.) Between the dates 26 August  6 September, the Germans destroyed more aircraft than they lost on only one day (1 September). Losses were 325 German and 248 British.(Hough and Richards 2007, p. 229.)Luftwaffe losses for August numbered 774 aircraft to all causes, representing 18.5 per cent of all combat aircraft at the beginning of the month.(Murray 1983, p. 50.) Fighter Commands losses in August were 426 fighters destroyed,(Wood and Dempster 2003, p. 314.) amounting to 40 per cent of 1,061 fighters available on 3 August.(Wood and Dempster 2003, p. 306.) In addition, 99 bombers and 27 other types were destroyed between 1 and 29 August.(Wood and Dempster 2003, p. 313.)From July to September, the Luftwaffes loss records indicate the loss of 1,636 aircraft, 1,184 to enemy action.( This represented 47 per cent of the initial strength of single-engined fighters, 66 per cent of twin-engined fighters, and 45 per cent of bombers. This indicates the Germans were running out of aircrews as well as aircraft.(Murray 1983, p. 52.)Throughout the battle, the Germans greatly underestimated the size of the RAF and the scale of British aircraft production. Across the Channel, the Air Intelligence division of the Air Ministry consistently overestimated the size of the German air enemy and the productive capacity of the German aviation industry. As the battle was fought, both sides exaggerated the losses inflicted on the other by an equally large margin. However, the intelligence picture formed before the battle encouraged the German Air Force to believe that such losses pushed Fighter Command to the very edge of defeat, while the exaggerated picture of German air strength persuaded the RAF that the threat it faced was larger and more dangerous than was the case.(Overy 2001, p. 125.) This led the British to the conclusion that another fortnight of attacks on airfields might force Fighter Command to withdraw their squadrons from the south of England. The German misconception, on the other hand,encouraged first complacency, then strategic misjudgement. The shift of targets from air bases to industry and communications was taken because it was assumed that Fighter Command was virtually eliminated.(Overy 2001, p. 126.) Between the 24 August and 4 September German serviceability rates, which were acceptable at Stuka units, were running at 75% with Bf 109s, 70% with bombers and 65% with Bf 110s, indicating a shortage of spare parts. All units were well below established strength. The attrition was beginning to affect the fighters in particular.(Bungay 2000, p. 298.) By 14 September the Luftwaffes  Bf 109 Geschwader possessed only 67 percent of their operational crews against authorised aircraft. For Bf 110 units it was 46 per cent; and for bombers it was 59 per cent. A week later the figures had dropped to 64 per cent, 52 per cent, and 52 per cent.( Serviceability rates in Fighter Commands fighter squadrons, between the 24 August and 7 September, were listed as: 64.8% on the 24 August; 64.7% on 31 August and 64.25% on the 7 September 1940, indicating a slow decline.(Due to the failure of the Luftwaffe to establish air supremacy, a conference assembled on 14 September at Hitlers headquarters. Hitler concluded that air superiority had not yet been established and promised to review the situation on 17 September for possible landings on 27 September or 8 October. Three days later, when the evidence was clear that the German Air Force had greatly exaggerated the extent of their successes against the RAF, Hitler postponed Sealion indefinitely.(Overy 2001, p. 97.)AftermathThe Battle of Britain marked the first defeat of Hitlers military forces, with air superiority seen as the key to victory.(Bungay 2000, pp. 370373.) Pre-war theories led to exaggerated fears of bombing, and British public opinion was invigorated by having come through the ordeal.(Bungay 2000, pp. 398399.) For the British, Fighter Command had achieved a great victory in successfully carrying out Sir Thomas Inskips 1937 air policy of preventing the Germans from knocking Britain out of the war.  The Fighter Command was so successful that the conclusion to Churchills famous Battle of Britain speech made in the House of Commons on 18 June, has come to refer solely to them: ...if the British Empire and its Commonwealth lasts for a thousand years, men will still say, This was their finest hour.(Putland, Alan L. Battle of Britain 1940: Britain Prepares for War. Battle of Britain Historical Society. Retrieved: 28 June 2010.)The Battle also signalled a significant shift in US opinion. During the battle, many people from the U.S. accepted the view promoted by Kennedy, the U.S. ambassador in London, and believed that Great Britain could not survive. However, Roosevelt wanted a second opinion, and sent Wild Bill Donovan on a brief visit to Britain; he became convinced Britain would survive and should be supported in every possible way.(Deighton 1996, introduction by A.J.P. Taylor, pp. 1217.)(Deighton 1996, pp. 172, 285.)Both sides in the battle made exaggerated claims of numbers of enemy aircraft shot down. In general, claims were two to three times the actual numbers, because of the confusion of fighting in dynamic three-dimensional air battles. Postwar analysis of records has shown that between July and September, the RAF claimed 2,698 kills, while the Luftwaffe fighters claimed 3,198 RAF aircraft downed. Total losses, and start and end dates for recorded losses, vary for both sides. Luftwaffe losses from 10 July to 30 October 1940 total 1,652 aircraft, including 229 twin- and 533 single-engined fighters.(Total losses by type of aircraft in the Battle of Britain. cz-raf.hyperlink.cz. Retrieved: 13 June 2010.) In the same period, RAF Fighter Command aircraft losses number 1,087, including 53 twin-engined fighters.( To the RAF figure should be added 376 Bomber Command and 148 Coastal Command aircraft conducting bombing, mining, and reconnaissance operations in defence of the country.(Bungay 2000, p. 368.)Dr. Andrew Gordon, who lectures at the Joint Services Command and Staff College, and a former lecturer Professor Gary Sheffield, have suggested the existence of the Royal Navy was enough to prevent the Germans from invading;(Evans 2006) even had the Luftwaffe won the air battle, the Germans had limited means with which to combat the Royal Navy, which would have intervened to prevent a landing. Some veterans of the battle point out the Royal Navy would have been vulnerable to air attack by the Luftwaffe if Germany had achieved air superiority,(Harding, 25 August 2006.) citing the fate of Prince of Wales and Repulse which, in December 1941, were sunk in an attack by Japanese aircraft.( However, in late May 1941, the Royal Navy was able to completely defeat the attempted seaborne invasion of Crete, despite overwhelming, and completely undisputed, Luftwaffe supremacy.()Though the claims about the Royal Navys ability to repel an invasion may be contested, there is a consensus among historians the Luftwaffe simply could not crush the RAF. Bungay described Dowding and Parks strategy of choosing when to engage the enemy whilst maintaining a coherent force as vindicated. The RAF proved to be a robust and capable organisation which was to use all the modern resources available to it to the maximum advantage.(Bungay 2000, pp. 394396.) Richard Evans wrote:Irrespective of whether Hitler was really set on this course, he simply lacked the resources to establish the air superiority that was the sine qua non of a successful crossing of the English Channel. A third of the initial strength of the German air force, the Luftwaffe, had been lost in the western campaign in the spring.  The Germans lacked the trained pilots, the effective fighter planes, and the heavy bombers that would have been needed.(Evans, Richard J. Immoral Rearmament. New York Review of Books, No. 20, 20 December 2007.)A more considered view of the battle has to take into account the vital role of the Royal Navy. It was widely acknowledged by both sides that the only way of achieving a successful invasion of the British Isles was through the establishment of naval supremacy. Given the inability of the Luftwaffe to effect real damage on the RN throughout the Battle and during the Dunkirk and Norwegian campaigns, as well as the lack of surface assets in the Kreigsmarines inventory, sea control of the Channel by Germany was impossible.  As one of the Few, Wg Cdr H R Allen said, It was sea power that ruled the day in 1940, and fortunately Britain had a sufficiency. The air situation was, of course, important, but by no means fundamental. Without doubt the five hundred of so section, flight and squadron commanders in Fighter Command earned their laurels. But the real victor was the Royal Navy, the Silent Service.(Cumming, Anthony J. The Royal Navy and The Battle of Britain. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2010. ISBN 978-1591141600.)The Luftwaffe had 1,380 bombers on 29 June 1940. By 2 November 1940 this had increased to 1,423,(Murray 1983, pp. 5355.) and to 1,511 by 21 June 1941, prior to Barbarossa, but showing a drop of 200 from 1,711 reported on 11 May 1940.(Murray 1983, p. 80.)(de Zeng et al. Vol. 1, 2007, p. 10.) 1,107 single- and 357 twin-engined daylight fighters were reported on strength prior to the Battle on 29 June 1940, compared to 1,440 single- and 188 twin-engined fighters, plus 263 fighters, on 21 June 1941.((The Germans launched some spectacular attacks against important British industries, but they could not destroy the British industrial potential, and made little systematic effort to do so. Hindsight does not disguise the fact that the threat to Fighter Command was very real, and for the participants it seemed as if there was a narrow margin between victory and defeat. Nevertheless, even if the German attacks on the 11 Group airfields which guarded southeast England and the approaches to London had continued, the RAF could have withdrawn to the Midlands out of German fighter range and continued the battle from there.(Wood and Dempster 2003, p. 80.) The victory was as much psychological as physical. Alfred Price:The truth of the matter, borne out by the events of 18 August is more prosaic: neither by attacking the airfields, nor by attacking London, was the Luftwaffe likely to destroy Fighter Command. Given the size of the British fighter force and the general high quality of its equipment, training and morale, the Luftwaffe could have achieved no more than a Pyrrhic victory. During the action on 18 August it had cost the Luftwaffe five trained aircrewmen killed, wounded or taken prisoner, for each British fighter pilot killed or wounded; the ratio was similar on other days in the battle. And this ratio of 5:1 was very close to that between the number of German aircrew involved in the battle and those in Fighter Command. In other words the two sides were suffering almost the same losses in trained aircrew, in proportion to their overall strengths. In the Battle of Britain, for the first time during the Second World War, the German war machine had set itself a major task which it patently failed to achieve, and so demonstrated that it was not invincible. In stiffening the resolve of those determined to resist Hitler the battle was an important turning point in the conflict.(Price 1980, pp. 182183.)The British triumph in the Battle of Britain was won at a heavy cost. Total British civilian losses from July to December 1940 were 23,002 dead and 32,138 wounded, with one of the largest single raids on 19 December 1940, in which almost 3,000 civilians died.The brilliant leadership of Dowding and Keith Park in successfully proving their theories of air defence, however, had created enmity among RAF senior commanders and both were sacked from their posts in the immediate aftermath of the battle.(Deighton 1996, pp. 266268.)The end of the battle allowed Britain to rebuild its military forces and establish itself as an Allied stronghold. Britain later served as a base from which the Liberation of Western Europe was launched.(Battle of Britain DayChurchill summed up the effect of the battle and the contribution of Fighter Command with the words, Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few.((Speech to the House of Commons on 20 August 1940.) Pilots who fought in the Battle have been known as Few ever since. Battle of Britain Day is commemorated in the United Kingdom on 15 September. Within the Commonwealth, Battle of Britain Day is usually observed on the third Sunday in September. In some areas in the British Islands, it is celebrated on the second Thursday in September.FilmThe story of the battle was documented in, amongst many others, the 1969 film Battle of Britain, which drew many respected British actors to act key figures of the battle, including Sir Olivier as Dowding and Howard as Park. It also starred Caine, Plummer and Robert Shaw as Squadron Leaders. Former participants of the battle served as technical advisors including Bader, Lacey, Stanford Tuck, Adolf Galland and Dowding himself. An Italian film around the same time titled Over London (1969) also featured the Battle of Britain.It was also the subject of the 1941 Allied film Island, winner of the first-ever Award for Documentary Short Subject.(Churchills Island. NFB.ca, National Film Board of Canada. Retrieved: 17 February 2009.)In 2010, actor Glover played a 101-year-old Polish veteran RAF pilot in the short film, Battle for Britain.(Dreaming Spires. The Economist via economist.com, 16 September 2010. Retrieved: 29 September 2010.)See also* warfare of World War II*Battle Information** of Britain RAF squadrons** Battle of Britain RAF airfields** of RAF aircrew in the Battle of Britain** of military aircraft operational during World War II** Banquet** Lucid*Battle in contemporary history** Darkest Hour** Few** Blitz** Air Forces in France and Great Britain** of civilians in Britain during World War II** of the Luftwaffe (19331945)*Post-war memorials** of Britain Memorial Flight** of Britain Memorial, Capel-le-Ferne** of Britain Monument in London** Battle of Britain Museum** Battle of Britain Class steam locomotives of the Southern RailwayReferences;Footnotes;CitationsBibliographyGeneral* Allen, Hubert Raymond Dizzy, Wing Commander, RAF. Who Won the Battle of Britain? London: Arthur Barker, 1974. ISBN 0-213-16489-2.* Bishop, Edward. Their Finest Hour: The Battle of Britain 1940. London: Ballantine Books, 1968.* Buckley, John. Air Power in the Age of Total War. London: UCL Press, 1999. ISBN 1-85728-589-1.* Buell, Thomas. The Second World War: Europe and the Mediterranean. New York: Square One Publishers, 2002. ISBN 978-0757001604.* Bungay, Stephen. The Most Dangerous Enemy: A History of the Battle of Britain. London: Aurum Press, 2000. ISBN 1-85410-721-6 (hardcover), 2002, ISBN 1-85410-801-8 (paperback).* Churchill, Winston S. The Second World War  Their Finest Hour (Volume 2). London: Cassell, 1949.* Corum, James. The Luftwaffe: Creating the Operational Air War, 19181940. Kansas University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-7006-0836-2* Deighton, Len. The True Story of the Battle of Britain. London: Pimlico, 1996. (Originally published: London: Jonathan Cape, 1977.) ISBN 0-71267-423-3.* Deighton, Len. Battle of Britain. London: Cape, 1980. ISBN 0-22401-826-4.* de Zeng, Henry L., Doug G. Stankey and Eddie J. Creek. Bomber Units of the Luftwaffe 19331945: A Reference Source, Volume 1. Hersham, Surrey, UK: Ian Allen Publishing, 2007. ISBN 978-1-85780-279-5.* Dnitz, Karl. Ten years and Twenty Days. New York: Da Capo Press, First Edition, 1997. ISBN 0-306-80764-5.* Dye, Air Commodore Peter J. Logistics and the Battle of Britain. Air Force Journal of Logistics No. 24, Vol 4, Winter 2000.* Ellis, John. Brute Force: Allied Strategy and Tactics in the Second World War. London: Andre Deutsch, 1990. ISBN 0-8264-8031-4.* Evans, Michael. Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to... the Navy. The Times, 24 August 2006. Retrieved: 3 March 2007.*Haining, Peter. The Chianti Raiders: The Extraordinary Story of the Italian Air Force in the Battle of Britain. London: Robson Books, 2005. ISBN1-86105-829-2* Halpenny, Bruce Barrymore. Action Station 4: Military Airfields of Yorkshire. Cambridge, UK: Patrick Stevens, 1984. ISBN 0-85059-532-0.* Harding, Thomas. Battle of Britain was won at sea. The Telegraph, 25 August 2006. Retrieved: 25 August 2006.* Holland, James. The Battle of Britain. London: Bantam, 2010. ISBN 978-0-59305-913-5.* Hooton, E.R. Luftwaffe at War: Blitzkrieg in the West, Vol. 2. London: Chevron/Ian Allen, 2007. ISBN 978-1-85780-272-6.* Hough, Richard and Denis Richards. The Battle of Britain: The Greatest Air Battle of World War II. New York: W.W. Norton & Co Inc, 2007. ISBN 978-0393027662.* Irving, David. The Rise and Fall of the Luftwaffe: The Life of Field Marshal Erhard Milch. Dorney, Windsor, UK: Focal Point Publications, 1974. ISBN 978-029776-532-5. * Keegan, John. The Second World War London: Pimlico, 1997. ISBN 978-0712673488.* Kieser, Egbert. Operation Sea Lion; The German Plan to Invade Britain 1940. London: Cassel Military Paperbacks, 1999. ISBN 0-304-35208-X.* Kieser, Egbert. Unternehmen Seelwe: Die geplante Invasion in England 1940 (in German). Berlin, Germany: Becthle, 2000. ISBN 3-76280-457-5.* Korda, Michael. With Wings Like Eagles: The Untold Story of the Battle of Britain. New York: Harper Perennial, 2010. ISBN 978-0-06-112536-2.* Macksey, Kenneth. Invasion: The German Invasion of England, July 1940. London: Greenhill Books, 1990. ISBN 0-85368-324-7.* Murray, Willamson. Strategy for Defeat. The Luftwaffe 19351945. Princeton, New Jersey: University Press of the Pacific, 2002. ISBN 0-898-75797-5.* Overy, Richard. The Battle of Britain: The Myth and the Reality. New York: W.W. Norton, 2001. ISBN 0-393-02008-8 (hardcover); 2002, ISBN 0-393-32297-1(paperback).* Peszke, Michael Alfred. A Synopsis of Polish-Allied Military Agreements During World War Two. Journal of Military History , Volume 44, No. 3, October 1980, pp. 128134.* Ponting, Clive. 1940: Myth and reality. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1991. ISBN 978-1-56663-036-8.* Pope, Stephan. Across the Ether: Part One. Aeroplane, Vol. 23, No. 5, Issue No. 265, May 1995.* Price, Alfred. The Hardest Day: 18 August 1940. New York: Charles Scribners Sons, 1980. ISBN 0-684-16503-1.* Ramsay, Winston, ed. The Blitz Then and Now: Volume 1. London: Battle of Britain Prints International Ltd, 1987. ISBN 0-900913-45-2.* Raeder, Erich. Erich Rader, Grand Admiral. New York: Da Capo Press. United States Naval Institute, 2001. ISBN 0-306-80962-1.* Ramsay, Winston, ed. The Blitz Then and Now: Volume 2. London: Battle of Britain Prints International Ltd, 1988. ISBN 0-900913-54-1.* Ramsay, Winston, ed. The Battle of Britain Then and Now Mk V. London: Battle of Britain Prints International Ltd, 1989. ISBN 0-900913-46-0.* Robinson, Derek. Invasion, 1940: Did the Battle of Britain Alone Stop Hitler? New York: Carroll & Graf, 2005. ISBN 0-7867-1618-5.*Shulman, Milton. Defeat in the West. London: Cassell, 2004 (First edition 1947). ISBN 03-0436-603-X.* Shirer, William. The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany. London: Ballantine, 1991. ISBN 978-0449219775.* Taylor, A.J.P. and S.L. Mayer, eds. A History Of World War Two. London: Octopus Books, 1974. ISBN 0-70640-399-1.* Terraine, John. The Right of the Line: The Royal Air Force in the European War, 19391945. New York: Sceptre, 1985. ISBN 0-340-41919-9.* Terraine, John. A Time for Courage: The Royal Air Force in the European War, 19391945. London: Macmillan, 1985. ISBN 978-0026169707.* Winterbotham, F.W. The Ultra Secret. London: Futura Publications Limited, 1975. ISBN 0-860-07268-1 (paperback).* Wood, Derek and Derek Dempster. The Narrow Margin: The Battle of Britain and the Rise of Air Power, 19301949. London: Pen & Sword, 2003, First edition 1961. ISBN 978-0850529159.* Wright, Gordon. The Ordeal of Total War: 19391945. New York: Harper & Row, 1968.Autobiographies and biographies* Deere, Alan C. Nine Lives. London: Hodder Paperbacks Ltd for Coronet Books, 1974. ISBN 0-340-01441-5.* Duncan Smith, Group Captain W.G.G. Spitfire into Battle. London: John Murray, 2002. ISBN 0-71955-484-5.* Franks, Norman. Wings of Freedom: Twelve Battle of Britain Pilots. London: William Kimber, 1980. ISBN 0-7183-01978.* Galland, Adolf. The First and the Last: Germanys Fighter Force in WWII (Fortunes of War). South Miami, Florida: Cerberus Press, 2005. ISBN 1-84145-020-0.* Halpenny, Bruce Barrymore. Fight for the Sky: Stories of Wartime Fighter Pilots. Cambridge, UK: Patrick Stephens, 1986. ISBN 0-85059-749-8.* Halpenny, Bruce Barrymore. Fighter Pilots in World War II: True Stories of Frontline Air Combat (paperback). Barnsley, UK: Pen and Sword Books Ltd, 2004. ISBN 1-84415-065-8.* Orange, Vincent. Park: The Biography of Air Chief Marshal Sir Keith Park. London: Grub Street, 2001. ISBN 1-902-304-616.Aircraft* Ansell, Mark. Boulton Paul Defiant: Technical Details and History of the Famous British Night Fighter. Redbourn, Herts, UK: Mushroom Model Publications, 2005. pp. 712714. ISBN 8-389-45019-4.* de Zeng, Henry L., Doug G. Stankey and Eddie J. Creek. Bomber Units of the Luftwaffe 19331945: A Reference Source, Volume 2. Hersham, Surrey, UK: Ian Allen Publishing, 2007. ISBN 978-1-903223-87-1.* Feist, Uwe. The Fighting Me 109. London: Arms and Armour Press, 1993. ISBN 1-85409-209-X.* Goss, Chris. Dornier 17: In Focus. Surrey, UK: Red Kite Books, 2005. ISBN 0-9546201-4-3.* Green, William. Famous Fighters of the Second World War. London: Macdonald, 1962.* Holmes, Tony. Hurricane Aces 19391940 (Aircraft of the Aces). Botley, Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 1998. ISBN 1-85532-597-7.* Holmes, Tony. Spitfire vs Bf 109: Battle of Britain. Oxford, London: Osprey Publishing, 2007. ISBN 978-1-84603-190-8.* Huntley, Ian D. Fairey Battle, Aviation Guide 1. Bedford, UK: SAM Publications, 2004. ISBN 0-9533465-9-5.*Jones, Robert C. Camouflage and Markings Number 8:Boulton Paul Defiant, RAF Norther Europe 193645. London: Ducimus Book Limited.* Mason, Francis K. Hawker Aircraft since 1920. London: Putnam, 1991. ISBN 0-85177-839-9.* McKinstry, Leo. Hurricane: Victor of the Battle of Britain. London: John Murray Publishers, 2010. ISBN 1-84854-339-5* Molson, Kenneth M. et al. Canadas National Aviation Museum: Its History and Collections. Ottawa: National Aviation Museum, 1988. ISBN 978-0-660-12001-0.* Moyes, Philip, J.R. The Fairey Battle. Aircraft in Profile, Volume 2 (nos. 2548). Windsor, Berkshire, UK: Profile Publications, 1971. ISBN 0-85383-011-8* Parry, Simon W. Intruders over Britain: The Story of the Luftwaffes Night Intruder Force, the Fernnachtjager. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Books, 1989. ISBN 0-904811-07-7.* Price, Alfred. Spitfire Mark I/II Aces 193941 (Aircraft of the Aces 12). London: Osprey Books, 1996, ISBN 1-85532-627-2.* Price, Alfred. The Spitfire Story: Revised second edition. Enderby, Leicester, UK: Silverdale Books, 2002. ISBN 1-85605-702-X.* Sarkar, Dilip. How the Spitfire Won the Battle of Britain. London: Amberly, 2011. ISBN 1-84868-868-7.* Scutts, Jerry. Messerschmitt Bf 109: The Operational Record. Sarasota, FL: Crestline Publishers, 1996. ISBN 978-076-030262-0.* Ward, John. Hitlers Stuka Squadrons. London: Brown Reference, 2004. ISBN 0-76031-991-X.* Warner, G. The Bristol Blenheim: A Complete History. London: Crcy Publishing, 2nd edition 2005. ISBN 0-85979-101-7.* Weal, John. Messerschmitt Bf 110 Zerstrer Aces of World War 2. Botley, Oxford UK: Osprey Publishing, 1999. ISBN 1-85532-753-8.Additional references;Books* Addison, Paul and Jeremy Crang. The Burning Blue: A New History of the Battle of Britain. London: Pimlico, 2000. ISBN 0-7126-6475-0.* Bergstrm, Christer. Barbarossa  The Air Battle: JulyDecember 1941. London: Chervron/Ian Allen, 2007. ISBN 978-1-85780-270-2.* Bishop, Patrick. Fighter Boys: The Battle of Britain, 1940. New York: Viking, 2003 (hardcover, ISBN 0-670-03230-1); Penguin Books, 2004. ISBN 0-14-200466-9. As Fighter Boys: Saving Britain 1940. London: Harper Perennial, 2004. ISBN 0-00-653204-7.* Brittain, Vera. Englands Hour. London: Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005 (paperback, ISBN 0-8264-8031-4); Obscure Press  (paperback, ISBN 1-84664-834-3).* Cooper, Matthew. The German Air Force 19331945: An Anatomy of Failure. New York: Janes Publishing Incorporated, 1981. ISBN 0-531-03733-9.* Craig, Phil and Tim Clayton. Finest Hour: The Battle of Britain. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000. ISBN 0-684-86930-6 (hardcover); 2006, ISBN 0-684-86931-4(paperback).* Fisher, David E. A Summer Bright and Terrible: Winston Churchill, Lord Dowding, Radar and the Impossible Triumph of the Battle of Britain. Emeryville, CA: Shoemaker & Hoard, 2005. ISBN 1-59376-047-7 (hardcover,); 2006, ISBN 1-59376-116-3 (paperback).* Foreman, John. Battle of Britain: The Forgotten Months, November And December 1940. Wythenshawe, Lancashire, UK: Crcy Publishing, 1989. ISBN 1-871187-02-8.* Gaskin, Margaret. Blitz: The Story of 29 December 1940. New York: Harcourt, 2006. ISBN 0-15-101404-3.* Haining, Peter. Where the Eagle Landed: The Mystery of the German Invasion of Britain, 1940. London: Robson Books, 2004. ISBN 1-86105-750-4.* Halpenny, Bruce Barrymore. Action Stations: Military Airfields of Greater London v. 8. Cambridge, UK: Patrick Stephens, 1984. ISBN 0-85039-885-1.* Harding, Thomas. Its baloney, say RAF aces. The Telegraph, 24 August 2006. Retrieved: 3 March 2007.* Hough, Richard. The Battle of Britain: The Greatest Air Battle of World War II. New York: W.W. Norton, 1989. ISBN 0-393-02766-X (hardcover); 2005, ISBN 0-393-30734-4(paperback).* James, T.C.G. The Battle of Britain (Air Defence of Great Britain; vol. 2). London/New York: Frank Cass Publishers, 2000. ISBN 0-7146-5123-0(hardcover);  ISBN 0-7146-8149-0 (paperback,).* James, T.C.G. Growth of Fighter Command, 19361940 (Air Defence of Great Britain; vol. 1). London; New York: Frank Cass Publishers, 2000. ISBN 0-7146-5118-4.* James, T.C.G. Night Air Defence During the Blitz. London/New York: Frank Cass Publishers, 2003. ISBN 0-7146-5166-4.* McGlashan, Kenneth B. with Owen P. Zupp. Down to Earth: A Fighter Pilot Recounts His Experiences of Dunkirk, the Battle of Britain, Dieppe, D-Day and Beyond. London: Grub Street Publishing, 2007. ISBN 1-90494-384-5.* March, Edgar J. British Destroyers; a History of Development 18921953. London: Seely Service & Co. Limited, 1966.* Olson, Lynne and Stanley Cloud. A Question of Honor: The Kociuszko Squadron: Forgotten Heroes of World War II. New York: Knopf, 2003. ISBN 0-37541-197-6. NB: This book is also published under the following title:** For Your Freedom and Ours: The Kociuszko Squadron  Forgotten Heroes of World War II.* Prien, Jochen and Peter Rodeike.Messerschmitt Bf 109 F,G, and K: An Illustrated Study. Atglen, Pennsylvania: Schiffer Publishing, 1995. ISBN 0-88740-424-3.* Ray, John. Battle of Britain. London: The Orion Publishing Co., 2003. ISBN 1-85409-345-2.* Ray, John Philip. The Battle of Britain: Dowding and the First Victory 1940. London: Cassel & Co., 2001. ISBN 0-304-35677-8.* Ray, John Philip. The Battle of Britain: New Perspectives: Behind the Scenes of the Great Air War. London: Arms & Armour Press, 1994 (hardcover, ISBN 1-85409-229-4); London: Orion Publishing, 1996 (paperback, ISBN 1-85409-345-2).* Rongers, Eppo H. De oorlog in mei 40, Utrecht/Antwerpen: Uitgeverij Het Spectrum N.V., 1969, No ISBN.* Townsend, Peter. Duel of Eagles (new edition). London: Phoenix, 2000. ISBN 1-84212-211-8.* Wellum, Geoffrey. First Light: The Story of the Boy Who Became a Man in the War-Torn Skies Above Britain. New York: Viking Books, 2002. ISBN 0-670-91248-4 (hardcover); Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons, 2003. ISBN 0-471-42627-X (hardcover); London: Penguin Books, 2003. ISBN 0-14-100814-8 (paperback).* Zaloga, Steven J. and Richard Hook. The Polish Army 193945. London: Osprey, 1982. ISBN 0-85045-417-4.External links; General* Day by Day blog charting the progress of the Battle by ex RAF veteran* Battle Of Britain Historical Society* video: Battle of Britain, (52 min.) complete film documentary by Capra made for U.S. Army* The Battle of Britain In Photos* Royal Air Force history* RAF Battle of Britain Roll of Honour* Battle of Britain Memorial* BBC History Overview of Battle*Historical recording BBC: Churchills This Was Their Finest Hour speech* Historical recording Radio New Zealand: Sir Keith Park describes Battle of Britain.(scroll down to 10:50 am, 25 April 2008).* Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding on the Battle of Britain (despatch to the Secretary of State, August 1941)* Royal Engineers Museum: Royal Engineers during the Second World War (airfield repair)* Shoreham Aircraft Museum* Tangmere Military Aviation Museum* Kent Battle of Britain Museum*ADLG Visits RAF Uxbridge Battle of Britain Operations Room* British Invasion Defences* Battle of Britain Website in Dutch.* The Falco and Regia Aeronautica in the Battle of Britain* History of North Weald Airfield* The Royal Mint Memorial website* New Zealanders in the Battle of Britain (NZHistory.net.nz)* Battle for Britain, short film starring Julian Glover* Interactive map showing Battle of Britain airfields and squadrons by dateza Britaniju dAnglaterrasa Britanyao Britniiom Englandum England de InglaterraGuduadAngleterrede Inglaterra za BritanijuBritaniadInghilterra iwwer Englandmiscsata  Britainom Engelandja:om Storbritanniao Anglida Gr-BretanhaAngliei of Britaino Britniu (druh svetov vojna)za Britanijo za BritanijuBritanniastaom Storbritannienth:Sava chin ti Anh Quczh:
58251
Nickelmetal_hydride_battery
NomV1.2 Vthumb|Disassembled NiMH AA cell: 1 - Positive terminal 2 - Outer metal casing (also negative terminal) 3 - Positive electrode 4 - Negative electrode with current collector (metal grid, connected to metal casing) 5 - Separator (between electrodes).A nickelmetal hydride cell, abbreviated NiMH, is a type of battery similar to the nickelcadmium cell. The NiMH battery uses a hydrogen-absorbing alloy for the negative electrode instead of cadmium. As in NiCd cells, the positive electrode is nickel oxyhydroxide (NiOOH). A NiMH battery can have two to three times the capacity of an equivalent size nickelcadmium battery. The density of a NiMH cell is similar to that of a lithium-ion cell, but the rate of self-discharge is higher. This means that a stored NiMH battery will lose charge more quickly. In 2005 a self-discharge NiMH battery, which stays charged for much longer, was developed.Common AA (penlight-size) NiMH batteries have nominal charge capacities (C) ranging from 1100 mAh to 3100 mAh at 1.2 V, measured at the rate that discharges the cell in five hours. Useful discharge capacity is a decreasing function of the discharge rate, but up to a rate of around 1C (full discharge in one hour), it does not differ significantly from the nominal capacity.(See graph, p.8 of )The typical energy for NiMH AA cells is about 100 Wh/kg, and for other NiMH dry cells about 75 Wh/kg (270 kJ/kg), compared to 4060 Wh/kg for NiCd, or 100-160 Wh/kg for Li-ion. NiMH has a volumetric energy density of about 300 Wh/L (1080 MJ/m), significantly better than nickelcadmium at 50150 Wh/L, and about the same as Li-ion at 250-360 Wh/L.About 22% of portable rechargeable batteries sold in Japan in 2010 were nickelmetal hydride.() In Switzerland in 2009, the equivalent statistic was approximately 60%.() This percentage has fallen over time due to the increase in manufacture of lithium ion batteries: in 2000, almost half of all portable rechargeable batteries sold in Japan were nickelmetal hydride.(HistoryThe first consumer grade NiMH cells for smaller applications appeared on the market in 1989, the culmination of over two decades of research and development.(In search of the perfect battery, Economist, 6 March 2008)The earliest pioneering work on NiMH batteries &mdash; essentially based on sintered Ti2Ni+TiNi+x alloys for the negative electrode and NiOOH-electrodes for the positives &mdash; was performed at the Battelle-Geneva Research Center starting after its invention in 1967. The development work was sponsored over nearly two decades by Daimler-Benz in Stuttgart, Germany, and by AG within the framework of Deutsche Automobilgesellschaft, now a subsidiary of AG. The batteries showed high specific energy up to 50 Wh/kg (180 kJ/kg), power density up to 1000 W/kg and a reasonable life of 500 cycles (at 100% of discharge). Patent applications were filed in European countries (priority: Switzerland), United States and Japan and the patents transferred to Daimler-Benz.(The US patent is . For the performance data, see the Examples section.)Interest grew in the 1970s with the commercialisation of the hydrogen battery for satellite applications. Hydride technology promised an alternative much less bulky way to store the hydrogen.  Research carried out by Philips Laboratories and Frances CNRS developed new high-energy hybrid alloys incorporating earth metals for the negative electrode.  However, these suffered from the instability of the alloys in alkaline electrolyte and consequently insufficient cycle life. In 1987, Willems and Buschow demonstrated a successful battery based on this approach (using a mixture of La0.8Nd0.2Ni2.5Co2.4Si0.1) which kept 84% of its charge capacity after 4000 charge-discharge cycles. More economically viable alloys using mischmetal instead of lanthanum were soon developed and modern NiMH cells are based on this design.()Ovonic Battery Co. in Michigan altered and improved the Ti-Ni alloy structure and composition according to their patent() and licensed NiMH batteries to over 50 companies worldwide. Ovonics NiMH variation consisted of special alloys with disordered alloy structure and specific multicomponent alloy compositions. Unfortunately, linked to their composition, the calendar and cycle life of such alloys always remains very low, and all NiMH batteries manufactured at the present time consist of AB5-type rare earth metal alloys.Positive electrode development was done by Dr. Oshitani from Yuasa Company, who was the first to develop high-energy paste electrode technology. The association of this high-energy electrode with high-energy hybrid alloys for the negative electrode led to the new environmentally friendly high-energy NiMH cell.Currently, more than 2 million hybrid cars worldwide are running with NiMH batteries,(Avicenne Conf., Nice 2008, M.A. Fetcenko/ECD) e.g., Prius, Lexus (Toyota), Civic, Insight (Honda), Fusion (Ford), and others. Many of these batteries are manufactured by PEVE (Panasonic) and Sanyo. Applications Image:Ni-MH Battery 01.JPG|thumb|High power Ni-MH Battery of Toyota NHW20 Prius, JapanImage:Nickel-Metallhydrid-Batterie.jpg|thumb|Nickel-metal hydride 24V battery pack made by VARTA, Autovision, Altlussheim, GermanyApplications of NiMH electric vehicle batteries includes all-electric plug-in vehicles such as the Motors EV1, EV Plus, Ranger EV and Vectrix scooter. vehicles such as the Toyota Prius, Insight, Escape Hybrid, Malibu Hybrid, and Civic Hybrid also use them. NiMH technology is used extensively in batteries for electronics, and it will also be used on the Alstom Citadis floor tram ordered for Nice, France; as well as the humanoid prototype robot ASIMO designed by Honda.  NiMH Batteries are also commonly used in Airsoft Guns.ElectrochemistryThe negative electrode reaction occurring in a NiMH cell is:\mathrm{H_2O + M + e^- \leftrightharpoons OH^- + MH}The charge reaction is read left-to-right and the discharge reaction is read right-to-left.On the positive electrode, nickel oxyhydroxide (NiOOH) is formed,:\mathrm{Ni(OH)_2 + OH^- \leftrightharpoons NiO(OH) + H_2O + e^-}The metal M in the negative electrode of a NiMH cell is actually an intermetallic compound. Many different compounds have been developed for this application, but those in current use fall into two classes. The most common is AB5, where A is a rare earth mixture of lanthanum, cerium, neodymium, praseodymium and B is nickel, cobalt, manganese, and/or aluminium. Very few cells use higher-capacity negative material electrodes based on AB2 compounds, where A is titanium and/or vanadium and B is zirconium or nickel, modified with chromium, cobalt, iron, and/or manganese, due to the reduced life performances.() Any of these compounds serve the same role, reversibly forming a mixture of metal hydride compounds.When overcharged at low rates, oxygen produced at the positive electrode passes through the separator and recombines at the surface of the negative. Hydrogen evolution is suppressed and the charging energy is converted to heat. This process allows NiMH cells to remain sealed in normal operation and to be maintenance-free.NiMH cells have an alkaline electrolyte, usually hydroxide. For separation hydrophilic polyolefin nonwovens are used.(Japanese Nonwoven Battery Applications)ChargingThe charging voltage is in the range of 1.41.6 V/cell. In general, a constant-voltage charging method cannot be used for automatic charging. When fast-charging, it is advisable to charge the NiMH cells with a smart charger to avoid overcharging, which can damage cells and even be dangerous.() A NiCd charger should not be used as an automatic substitute for a NiMH charger.Trickle chargingThe simplest way to safely charge a NiMH cell is with a fixed low current, with or without a timer. Most manufacturers claim that overcharging is safe at very low currents, below 0.1 C (where C is the current equivalent to the capacity of the battery divided by one hour).(). The Panasonic NiMH charging manual warns that overcharging for long enough can damage a battery and suggests limiting the total charging time to 10 to 20 hours.(Duracell further suggests that, for applications where the battery must be kept in a fully charged state, a trickle charge at 0.0033 C can be used.( Some chargers do this after the charge cycle, to offset the natural self-discharge rate of the battery. Panasonics handbook, however, recommends that such batteries are kept charged by a lower cycle approach, where a pulse of a higher current is used whenever the batterys voltage drops below 1.3 V. This can extend battery life and use less energy.(V charging methodthumb|400px|NiMH Charge curveIn order to charge a NiMH battery faster than the trickle method suggested above, a charger must know when to stop charging in order to avoid damaging the battery. One method is to monitor the change of voltage across the battery with time. As can be seen in the charge curve diagram, when the battery is fully charged the voltage across its terminals drops slightly.  The charger can detect this and stop charging. This method is often used with Nickel-Cadmium cells which have a large drop in voltage at full charge but the voltage drop is much less pronounced for NiMH and can be non-existent at high charge rates, which can make the approach unreliable. Another option is to monitor the change of voltage with respect to time and stop when this becomes zero, but this runs the risk of premature cutoffs.(With this method, a much higher charging rate can be used than with a trickle charge, up to 1 C. At this charge rate, V is approximately 510mV per cell.( Since this method measures the voltage across the battery, a constant current (rather than a constant voltage) charging circuit must be used. This is unlike a cell for example, which can, in theory, be more easily charged at a suitably chosen constant voltage.T temperature charging methodThe T temperature change method is similar in principle to the V method. Because the charging voltage is nearly constant, constant-current charging delivers energy at a near-constant rate. When the cell is not fully charged, most of this energy is converted to chemical energy. However, when the cell reaches full charge, most of the charging energy is converted to heat. This increases the rate of change of battery temperature, which can be detected by a sensor such as a thermistor. Both Panasonic and Duracell suggest a maximum rate of temperature increase of 1C per minute. Using a temperature sensor also allows an absolute temperature cutoff, which Duracell suggests at 60C.(With both the T and the V charging methods, both manufacturers recommend a further period of trickle charging to follow the initial rapid charge.Safetythumb|right|NiMH which popped its cap due to failed safety valveA good safety feature of a custom-built charger is to use a fuse in series with the cell, particularly of the strip type. This fuse will open if either the current or the temperature goes too high.(Modern NiMH cells contain catalysts to immediately deal with gases developed as a result of over-charging without being harmed (2 H2 + O2 ---catalyst  2 H2O). However, this only works with overcharging currents of up to 0.1C (capacity divided by 10 hours). As a result of this reaction, the batteries will heat up considerably, marking the end of the charging process.( Some quick chargers have a fan to keep the batteries cool.A method for very rapid charging called in-cell charge control involves an internal pressure switch in the cell, which disconnects the charging current in the event of overpressure.There is an inherent risk with NiMH chemistry that overcharging will cause a buildup of hydrogen, causing the cell to rupture. Therefore, cells have a vent. Hydrogen will be emitted from the vent in the event of serious overcharging.(Mukund R. Patel (2005), Spacecraft Power Systems CRC Press ISBN 9780849327865 Page 209) Discharging A fully charged cell measures 1.41.45 V (unloaded), and supplies a nominal average 1.25 V/cell during discharge, down to about 1.01.1 V/cell (further discharge may cause permanent damage in the case of multi-cell packs, due to polarity reversal). This voltage varies depending on the discharge rate of the cell (lower discharge loads result in an increased voltage output for longer periods, approaching the 1.4 V unloaded cell voltage).Under a light load (0.5 ampere), the starting voltage of a freshly charged AA NiMH cell in good condition is about 1.4 volts;(Energizer NH15-2300mAh datasheet)some measure almost 1.5 volts. This voltage falls rapidly to about 1.25 volts at 10% depth of discharge (DOD) and then remains almost constant until the cell is over 80% discharged. The voltage then falls rapidly from about 1.2 volts down to 0.81.0 volts at which the cell is considered flat in most devices. Mid-discharge at a load of 1 ampere, the output is about 1.2 volts; at 2 amperes, about 1.15 volts; the total effective differential internal resistance is about 0.05 ohms. Nickel metal hydride batteries provide a relatively constant voltage for most of the discharge cycle, unlike a standard alkaline where the voltage falls steadily during discharge.(NiMh Battery Shoot Out SilverFox, 20052008) Over-discharging A complete discharge of a cell until it goes into polarity reversal can cause permanent damage to the cell. This situation can occur in the common arrangement of four AA cells in series in a camera, where one will be completely discharged before the others due to small differences in capacity among the cells. When this happens, the good cells will start to drive the discharged cell in reverse, which can cause permanent damage to that cell. Some cameras, GPS receivers and PDAs detect the safe end-of-discharge voltage of the series cells and auto-shutdown, but devices like flashlights and some toys do not. A single cell driving a load cant suffer from polarity reversal, because there are no other cells to reverse-charge it when it becomes discharged.Irreversible damage from polarity reversal is a particular danger in systems, even when a low voltage threshold cutout is employed, where cells in the battery are of different temperatures. This is because the capacity of NiMH cells significantly declines as the cells are cooled. This results in a lower voltage under load of the colder cells.(Sandeep Dhameja (2002), Electric Vehicle Battery Systems, Newnes, ISBN 0750699167, pp. 118, 123) Self-discharge NiMH cells historically had a somewhat higher self-discharge rate (equivalent to internal leakage) than NiCd cells. The self-discharge is 510% on the first day and stabilizes around 0.51% per day at temperature.( )()()( )()This is not a problem in the short term but makes them unsuitable for many light-duty uses, such as clocks, remote controls, or safety devices, where the battery would normally be expected to last many months or years.  The rate is strongly affected by the temperature at which the batteries are stored with cooler storage temperatures leading to slower discharge rate and longer battery life.  The highest capacity cells on the market (>8000 mAh) are reported to have the highest self-discharge rates. Low self-discharge cells A new type of nickel-metal hydride cell was introduced in 2005 that reduces self-discharge and therefore lengthens shelf life.  By using a new separator, manufacturers claim the cells retain 70% to 85% of their capacity after one year when stored at 20 C (68 F).  These cells are marketed as hybrid, ready-to-use or pre-charged rechargeables.  Besides the longer shelf life, they are otherwise similar to normal NiMH batteries of equivalent capacity and can be charged in typical NiMH chargers.Low self-discharge cells have lower capacity than some standard NiMH cells due to the larger area of the separator. The highest capacity low-self-discharge cells have 20002500 mAh and 1000 mAh capacities for AA and AAA cells respectively, compared to 2800 mAh and 1300 mAh for standard AA and AAA cells.(us.sanyo.com: Product information for Sanyo Eneloop XX)  C types are typically higher than their usual NiMH cousins, with 4000 mAh and the D type being 8000 mAh.However, after only a few weeks of storage, the retained capacity of low-self-discharge batteries often exceeds that of traditional NiMH batteries of higher capacity.(stefanv.com: Review: Testing Sanyos Eneloop Rechargeable Battery) Environmental impact Improper disposal of NiMH batteries poses less environmental hazard than that of NiCd because of the absence of toxic cadmium.  However, mining and processing the various alternate metals that form the negative electrode may pose other types of environmental impact, depending on the metal, mining method, and environmental practices of the mine.Most industrial nickel is recycled, due to the relatively easy retrieval of the  magnetic from scrap using electromagnets, and due to its high value.  Comparison with other battery types NiMH cells and chargers are readily available in retail stores in the common sizes AAA and AA. Adapter sleeves are available to use the more common AA size in C and D applications. The sizes C and D cells are somewhat available, but are often just a AA core hidden in an outer shell, with a rating of about 2500 mAh, much less than ordinary alkaline C and D batteries. Real NiMH C and D batteries are expensive (and the chargers are uncommon); they should be rated at least 5000 mAh for C and 10,000 mAh for D sizes.PP3 (nine volt) NiMH batteries are available; these usually have an output voltage of 8.4 V (1.2  7) and a capacity of roughly 200 mAh. Also available are eight-cell nine volt batteries with a nominal output voltage of 9.6 V (1.2  8).NiMH cells are not expensive, and the voltage and performance is similar to primary alkaline cells in those sizes; they can be substituted for most purposes. Although alkaline cells are rated at 1.5 volts and NiMH cells at 1.2 volts, during discharge the alkaline voltage eventually drops below that of NiMH.  NiMH batteries offer a flatter discharge curve, particularly at higher current draw.(http://www.eznec.com/Amateur/1.5_vs_1.2_Volt_Batteries.pdf)NiMH cells are often used in digital cameras and other high drain devices, where over the duration of single charge use they outperform primary (such as alkaline) batteries.( Applications that require frequent replacement of the battery, such as toys or video game controllers, also benefit from use of rechargeable batteries. With the development of low self-discharge NiMHs (see section above), many occasional-use and very low-power applications are now candidates for NiMH cells.(Choosing and Using NiMH Rechargeable Batteries)NiMH cells are particularly advantageous for high current drain applications, due in large part to their low internal resistance. Alkaline batteries, which might have approximately 3000 mAh capacity at low current demand (200 mA), will have about 700 mAh capacity with a 1000 mA load.(Alkaline Drain Chart at greenbatteries.com) Digital cameras with LCDs and flashlights can draw over 1000 mA, quickly depleting alkaline batteries. NiMH cells can deliver these current levels and maintain their full capacity.Certain devices that were designed to operate using primary alkaline chemistry (or zinc-carbon/chloride) cells will not function when one uses NiMH cells as substitutes. However, this is rare, as most devices compensate for the voltage drop of an alkaline as it discharges down to about 1 volt. A good-quality freshly charged NiMH cell delivers 1.41.45 V, very close to the 1.5 V that these devices expect. Such devices would also likely have an extremely short runtime as the voltage from an alkaline falls to 1.4 V quite quickly from the 1.5 V starting voltage. Low internal resistance allows NiMH cells to deliver a near-constant voltage until they are almost completely discharged. This will cause a battery level indicator to overstate the remaining charge if it was designed to read only the voltage curve of alkaline cells. The voltage of alkaline cells decreases steadily during most of the discharge cycle.Lithium ion batteries have a higher specific energy than nickel-metal hydride batteries,() but they are significantly more expensive to produce.(http://www.ovonics.com/PDFs/Batteries2009OctoberNiceConference.pdf ) In October 2009, ECD Ovonics announced that their next-generation NiMH batteries will provide specific energy and power that are comparable to those of lithium ion batteries at a cost that is significantly lower than the cost of lithium ion batteries.(Patent encumbrance in electric vehiclesR. Ovshinsky invented and patented the NiMH battery and founded Ovonic Battery Company in 1982.  Motors purchased the patent from Ovonics in 1994. By the late 1990s, NiMH batteries were being used successfully in many fully electric vehicles, such as the Motors EV1 and Dodge Caravan EPIC minivan.  In October 2000, the patent was sold to Texaco and a week later Texaco was acquired by Chevron. Chevrons Cobasys subsidiary will only provide these batteries to large OEM orders.  General Motors shut down production of the EV1 citing lack of battery availability as one of their chief obstacles.  The Cobasys control of NiMH batteries has created a patent encumbrance of large automotive NiMH batteries.(http://www.hybridcars.com/components/hybrid-battery-maker-cobasys-continues-falter-daimler-sues-0805.html)()()()()See also*battery*battery*Corporation*self-discharge NiMH battery*diffusion electrode*hydroxide*oxide*Car*encumbrance of large automotive NiMH batteries*ratio*recyclingReferencesExternal links*Bipolar Nickel Metal Hydride Battery by Martin G. Klein, Michael Eskra, Robert Plivelich and Paula Ralston*BatteryUniversity.com*Sanyo Eneloop NiMH Rechargeable Batteries Review*Choosing and Using NiMH Rechargeable Batteries*Duracell Ni-MH Technical Bulletin*Energizer Ni-MH Battery Datasheets*Rayovac battery Specifications and Product Guides*Brand Neutral Drawings of Nickel Metal Hydride Batteries*Chevron/Texacos patent on the NiMH batteryde nquel i hidrur metllichydridov akumultorda:Nikkel-metalhydrid-akkumulatorde:Nickel-Metallhydrid-Akkumulatorde nquel e hidruro metliconickel-hydrure mtalliquenichel-metallo idruroakkumultornl:Nikkel-metaalhydrideaccuja:niklowo-metalowo-wodorkowyde nquel-hidreto metlicohydride batteryfi:Nikkelimetallihydridiakkusv:Nickel-metallhydridackumulatorniken hirua kim loizh:
58585
Belmont
Belmont may refer to:Sport* Stakes, a horse race* Bombers, a junior ice hockey team in Belmont, Ontario* Shore RFC, a rugby union team in Long Beach, CaliforniaAutomobiles* (automobile), an American electric car sold in 1916* Belmont, an Australian car sold from 1968-1974* Belmont, a British car sold from 1986-1991GeographyAustralia* New South Wales* Queensland* Victoria* Western Australia, a suburb of Perth* of Belmont, a Local Government Area in Western Australia* district of Belmont, a state electorate represented in the Western Australian Legislative AssemblyCanada* Nova Scotia* Ontario* Prince Edward Island* Edmonton* Belmont, British Columbia aka Belmont, a former mining community on Princess Royal IslandFrance * Doubs* Gers* Isre* Jura* Haute-Marne* Bas-Rhin* Haute-SaneUnited Kingdom* (parish), County Durham* Ayr* Belfast an electoral ward in Northern Ireland* County Durham* East Sussex* Harrow, formerly served by Belmont railway station* Lancashire* Shetland* Sutton, served by Belmont railway station* Rural, HerefordshireUnited States* California* Township, Illinois* Indiana* Maine* Massachusetts* Michigan* Township, Minnesota* Mississippi* Nevada, a ghost town* New York, a village in Allegany County* Bronx, New York, a neighborhood in New York City* North Carolina* Ohio* County, Ohio* Portland, Oregon* Pennsylvania* District, Pennsylvania* Texas, in Gonzales County* Dallas, Texas* Vermont* Virginia, in Loudoun County* Roanoke, Virginia* Washington* West Virginia* Wisconsin, a village in Lafayette County* (town), Wisconsin, a town in Lafayette County* Portage County, WisconsinElsewhere* County Offaly, Ireland, a census town* Auckland, New Zealand* Wellington, New Zealand* South Africa, scene of the 1899 Battle of Belmont* Bellmund, Switzerland* Trinidad and TobagoSchools* Academy, Ayr, Scotland* Elementary School, British Columbia, Canada* High School (disambiguation), several schools in the United States* Preparatory High School, New York, United States* Public Schools, Belmont, Massachusetts* Secondary School, British Columbia, Canada* University, Tennessee, United StatesTransit stations* Railway Station, New Zealand* (Caltrain station)* (CTA North Side Main Line station)* (CTA Blue Line station)* (Metra)* railway station (Harrow), England* railway station (Sutton), England* Park railway station, AustraliaHistoric sites* House and Gardens, Kent, England* (Wayside, Mississippi), listed on the NRHP in Mississippi* (Bensalem, Pennsylvania), listed on the NRHP in Pennsylvania* Mansion (Philadelphia)* Mansion (Tennessee),* Manor House, Ashburn, Virginia* (Capron, Virginia), listed on the NRHP in Virginia* (Charlottesville, Virginia), listed on the NRHP in Virginia* Melchers Home, Falmouth, VirginiaPeople* Belmont (1853-1933), American socialite and suffrage supporter* Belmont (born 1957), American stock car racer* Belmont (1813-1890), American businessman and diplomat* Belmont, Jr. (1853-1924), American financier and thoroughbred racing enthusiast* Vachon de Belmont (1645-1732), Roman Catholic bishop* Belmont (born 1983), American soccer player* Belmont, American basketball player and coach* Belmont (born 1947), Seychellois politician* Belmont (born 1980), British actress* Belmont (1858-1908), American congressman* Belmont (1851-1947), American politician and diplomat* Belmont, snooker player, finalist in the IBSF World Snooker Championship* Belmont (born 1982), podcast host and producerOther uses* Abbey (disambiguation)* Airport* Avenue (Chicago)* Books, a publishing company* Report, a medical ethics report* Street (Aberdeen)* transmitting station, Lincolnshire, England* of Belmont (1899)* The Belmonts, several Castlevania characters* and Sherry Belmont, Zatch Bell! charactersSee also* Park (disambiguation)* (disambiguation)* (disambiguation)* (disambiguation) * Iowa(desambiguaci)ceb:Belmontde:Belmontes:Belmontfr:Belmontit:Belmonthe:sw:Belmontnl:Belmontno:Belmontoc:Blmontpms:Belmontpl:Belmontpt:Belmontsr:fi:Belmontsv:Belmontuk:vo:Belmont
59051
Queensland
Queensland is a state of Australia that occupies the north-eastern section of the mainland continent. It is bordered by the Territory to the west, South Australia to the south-west and South Wales to the south. To the east, Queensland is bordered by the Sea and Pacific Ocean. The state is Australias second largest by area, following Australia, and the countrys third most populous after New South Wales and Victoria.The area was first occupied by Australians and Strait Islanders, who arrived between 40,000 and 65,000 years ago, according to various dating methods.() Later, Queensland was made a British Colony that was separated from New South Wales on 6 June 1859, a date now celebrated state-wide as Day. The area that currently forms the state capital, Brisbane, was originally the Bay colony, intended as a place for recidivist convicts who had offended while serving out their sentences in New South Wales. The state later encouraged free settlement, and today Queenslands economy is dominated by the agricultural, tourist and natural resource sectors.The states population is concentrated in East Queensland, which includes Brisbane, Logan City, Ipswich, Toowoomba, and the Gold Coast and Sunshine Coast. Other major regional centres include Townsville, Cairns, Mackay, Rockhampton, Bay, Bundaberg and Isa.Queensland is often nicknamed the Sunshine State.Executive power rests with the Premier. Queensland is currently governed by Bligh of the Australian Labor Party, and is the states and the nations first popularly elected female premier.EtymologyThe state was named in honour of Victoria,(Place Names) who on 6 June 1859 signed Letters Patent separating the colony from New South Wales. At the time, Queen Victoria was a generally popular monarch, and she preferred an eponymous name for the new colony over Cooksland, which had been suggested by the influential local Presbyterian minister Dunmore Lang in honour of English navigator Cook.()()HistoryThe history of Queensland spans thousands of years, encompassing both a lengthy indigenous presence, as well as the eventful times of post-European settlement. Estimated to have been settled by Indigenous Australians approximately 40,000 years ago, the north-eastern Australian region was explored by Dutch, Portuguese and French navigators before being encountered by James Cook in 1770. The Labor Party has its origin as a formal organisation in Queensland and the town of Barcaldine is the symbolic birthplace of the party.() The state has witnessed frontier warfare between European settlers and Indigenous inhabitants, as well as the employment of cheap Kanaka labour sourced from the South Pacific. June 2009 marked the 150 anniversary of its creation as a separate colony from New South Wales.() A rare record of early settler life in north Queensland can be seen in a set of ten photographic glass plates taken in the 1860s by Daintree, in the collection of the Museum of Australia.(http://www.nma.gov.au/collections/richard_daintrees_glass_plates)Geographycities, towns, settlements and road networkQueensland is bordered to the north by the Strait with Boigu Island off the coast of Guinea representing the absolute northern extreme of the territory. The triangular York Peninsula, which points toward New Guinea is the northernmost part of the states mainland. West of the peninsulas tip, northern Queensland is bordered by the of Carpentaria, while the Sea an arm of the Pacific Ocean borders Queensland to the east. To the west, Queensland is bordered by the Northern Territory, at the 138E longitude, and to the south-west by the north-eastern corner of South Australia. In the south, there are three sections that comprise its border: the watershed from Point Danger to the River; the river section involving the Dumaresq, the MacIntyre and the Barwon; and 29S latitude (including some minor historical encroachments below the 29th parallel) over to the South Australian border. The state capital is Brisbane, located on the coast 100 kilometres (60 mi) by road north of the New South Wales border. The state is divided into several officially recognised regions. Other smaller geographical regions of note include the Tablelands, the Belt, and the Country in the far south-west.Queensland has many places of natural beauty, including: the Sunshine Coast and the Gold Coast having some of the states most popular beaches; the Bunya Mountains and the Dividing Range with numerous lookouts, waterfalls and picnic areas; Carnarvon Gorge; Whitsunday Islands and Island.The state contains six Heritage listed preservation areas: Australian Fossil Mammal Sites at Riversleigh in the Country, Rainforests of Australia, Island, Barrier Reef, National Park and the Tropics of Queensland.ClimateBecause of its size, there is significant variation in climate across the state. Low rainfall and hot summers are typical for the inland west, a monsoonal wet season in the far north, and warm temperate conditions along the coastal strip. Inland and in southern ranges low minimum temperatures are experienced.The climate of the coastal strip is influenced by warm ocean waters, keeping the region free from extremes of temperature and providing moisture for rainfall.()File:Brisbane During Twilight.jpg|thumb|right|State capital and most populous city, BrisbaneThere are five predominate climatic zones in Queensland,() based on temperature and humidity:* hot humid summer (far north and coastal)* warm humid summer (coastal elevated hinterlands and coastal south-east)* hot dry summer, mild winter (central west)* hot dry summer, cold winter (southern west)* temperate  warm summer, cold winter (inland south-east, e.g. Belt)However, most of the Queensland populace experience two weather seasons: a winter period of rather warm temperatures and minimal rainfall and a sultry summer period of hot, sticky temperatures and higher levels of rainfall.The annual mean statistics() for some Queensland centres is shown below:The highest maximum temperature observed in the state is 49.5 C (121 F) at Birdsville on 24 December 1972 (The temperature of 53.1 C (128 F) at Cloncurry on 16 January 1889 is not considered reliable; the figure quoted from Birdsville is the next highest, so that record is considered as being official).The lowest minimum temperature is 10.6 C (13 F) at Stanthorpe on 23 June 1961 and at The Hermitage on 12 July 1965.()DemographicsFile:TownsvilleSkyline08.jpg|thumb|Queensland has a less centralised population than other states, with significant populations in regional cities such as Townsville (above).A smaller proportion of Queenslands population lives in the capital city than any other mainland state. As of June 2004 the capital city represented 45.7% of the population; for the whole country, capital cities represented 63.8% of the total population.* Christian: 70.9%:** Roman Catholic: 24.9%** Anglican: 22.3%** Uniting: 8.4%** Lutheran: 2.1%** Other: 13.2%* Non-Christian: 2.3%** Buddhism: 1.1%** Islam: 0.4%** Hinduism: 0.3%** Judaism: 0.1%** Other: 0.4%* No Religion: 14.8%* Not Stated: 12.0%Population trendsOn 9 December 2005, the population of Queensland officially reached 4 million. According to Queenslands Office of Economic and Statistical Research the estimated population of the state at the end of 2007 was 4,228,290 which is almost 20% of Australias total. For many years until 2008, Queensland was the fastest growing state in Australia. At its peak growth in 2007, it was estimated that over 1,500 people moved to the state per week including 1,000 to the southern part of the state alone and the state recorded a TFR of 2.1, the highest since 1977.() Queenslands growth rate has since been surpassed by Western Australia()).Urban and ruralEconomyFile:ChildersCane.jpg|thumb|canefields south of ChildersQueenslands economy has enjoyed a boom in the tourism and mining industries over the past 20 years. A sizeable influx of interstate and overseas migrants, large amounts of federal government investment, increased mining of vast mineral deposits and an expanding aerospace sector have contributed to the states economic growth. The 200809 saw the expansion slow to just 0.8% the states worst performance in 18 years.()Between 1992 and 2002, the growth in the State Product of Queensland outperformed that of all the other states and territories. In that period Queenslands GSP grew 5.0% each year, while growth in Australias Gross Domestic Product (GDP) rose on average 3.9% each year. Queenslands contribution to the Australian GDP increased by 10.4% in that period, one of only three states to do so.()In 2003 Brisbane had the lowest cost of living of all Australias capital cities. In late 2005 Brisbane was the third most expensive capital for housing after Sydney and Canberra and just ahead of Melbourne by $15,000.Primary industries include: bananas, pineapples, peanuts, a wide variety of other tropical and temperate fruit and vegetables, grain crops, wineries, cattle raising, cotton, sugar cane, wool and a mining industry including bauxite, coal, silver, lead, zinc, gold, and copper. Secondary industries are mostly further processing of the above-mentioned primary produce. For example, bauxite is shipped by sea from Weipa and converted to alumina at Gladstone.() There is also copper refining and the refining of sugar cane to sugar at a number of mills along the eastern coastline. Major tertiary industries are the retail trade and tourism.TourismFile:Part of Great Barrier Reef from Helecopter.JPG|thumb|left|The Barrier Reef, as seen from a helicopterTourism is Queenslands leading tertiary industry with millions of interstate and overseas visitors flocking to the Sunshine State each year. The industry generates $4.0 billion annually, accounting for 4.5% of Queenslands GSP.() Queensland is a state of many landscapes that range from sunny tropical coastal areas, lush rainforests to dry inland areas.The main tourist destinations of Queensland include, Brisbane, North Queensland including Cairns, Port Douglas and the Rainforest, Gold Coast, the Barrier Reef, Bay and nearby Island, Queensland including Townsville and Magnetic Island, Stradbroke Island and Stradbroke Island, the Sunshine Coast and the Whitsundays known for Airlie Beach, Whitehaven Beach, Hamilton Island and Daydream Island.of Chevron Renaissance in the GC HWY.jpg|thumb|upright|The Gold Coast is a major Tourist city.The Gold Coast of Queensland is also sometimes referred to as Australias Theme Park Capital, with five major amusement parks. These are Dreamworld, World, World, Wet n Wild and World.There are also wildlife parks in Queensland, including::Gold Coast::* Wildlife Sanctuary at Currumbin::* Fleay Wildlife Park at Burleigh Heads:Sunshine Coast::* UnderWater World at Mooloolaba::* Zoo near Beerwah/Glass House Mountains, home of Irwin until his death in 2006.:Brisbane::* Pine Koala Sanctuary at Fig Tree Pocket::* Brisbane Forest Park at The Gap:North of Brisbane::* Park Zoo at Dakabin::* Kumbartcho Wildlife Sanctuary (originally Bunya Park Wildlife Sanctuary)Paradise, Brisbane, Australia, skyline seen from the south.JPG|thumb|Surfers Paradise skyline seen from the southAccommodation in Queensland caters for nearly 22% of the total expenditure, followed by restaurants/meals (15%), airfares (11%), fuel (11%) and shopping/gifts (11%).()TransportAirport.JPG|thumb|Cairns International AirportQueensland is served by a number of National Highways and, particularly in South East Queensland, high quality motorways such as the M1. Principal rail services are provided by Rail and National, predominantly along the coamajor ports including the of Brisbane and subsidiary ports at Gladstone and Townsville. Jet Vehicle services are Provided by Greenhouse Energy, Transport, Department of Main Roads, Force Reserve of Queensland, Brisbane Jet Taxi and Jetlines, Predominatly along the Airports, including the Airport, Coast Airport and Airport.Airport is the main international and domestic gateway serving the state. Coast Airport, International Airport and Airportare the next most prominent airports, all with scheduled international flights. Other regional airports, with scheduled domestic flights, include Barrier Reef Airport, Bay Airport, Airport, Isa Airport, / Whitsunday Coast Airport, Airport, and Coast Airport. South East Queensland is governed by an integrated public transport system, TransLink, which provides bus, rail and ferry services. Regional bus andlong-distance rail services are also provided throughout the State. Local bus services are also available in most regional centres.GovernanceFile:QueenslandBuilding0005.jpg|thumb|The Parliament House in Brisbane.Executive authority is vested in the Governor, who represents and is appointed by II on the advice of the Premier. The current governor is Ms. Wensley, AO. The head of government is the Premier, who is appointed by the Governor but must have the support of the Legislative Assembly. The current Premier is Bligh, of the Labor Party. Other ministers, forming the Executive Council, are appointed by the governor from among the members of the Legislative Assembly on the Premiers recommendation.  The Parliament or the Legislative Assembly, is unicameral. It is the only Australian state with a unicameral legislature. A bicameral system existed until 1922, when the Legislative Council was abolished by the Labor members suicide squad, so called because they were appointed for the purpose of voting to abolish their own offices. The Parliament is housed in the 19th century Parliament House and 20th century Parliamentary Annexe in Brisbane.The judicial system of Queensland consists of the Supreme Court and the District Court, established by the Queensland Constitution, and various other courts and tribunals established by ordinary Acts of the Queensland Parliament.In 2001 Queensland adopted a new codified constitution, repealing most of the assorted Acts of Parliament that had previously made up the constitution. The new constitution took effect on 6 June 2002, the anniversary of the formation of the colony of Queensland by the signing of Letters Patent by Queen Victoria in 1859. Local government Local government is the mechanism by which towns and districts can manage their own affairs to the extent permitted by the Local Government Act 19932007. Queensland is divided into 73 local government areas which may be called Cities, Towns, Shires or Regions.(Local Government Act 1993, s.34. (Reprint 11E, as in force at 22 November 2007.)) Each area has a council which is responsible for providing a range of public services and utilities, and derives its income from both rates and charges on resident ratepayers, and grants and subsidies from the State and Commonwealth governments.()UniversitiesFile:Bond University.jpg|thumb|University in Robina* Catholic University (Brisbane campus)* University* Queensland University* University* Cook University* University of Technology* of Queensland* of Southern Queensland* of the Sunshine CoastSportsFile:Brisbane Broncos vs Bulldogs 3.jpg|thumb|upright|The Broncos are one of the most successful teams in the Rugby League competitionFile:Mitchell Johnson.jpg|thumb|upright|The Bulls take part in Australias domestic cricket tournamentsThe state of Queensland is represented in all of Australias national sporting competitions and is also host to a number of domestic and international sporting events. The most popular winter and summer team sports are league, union and cricket, respectively. The annual rugby league State of Origin series is a major event in the Queensland sporting calendar, with the Queensland Maroons in 2011 winning a record sixth series in a row. The Broncos are the states most successful team of any sport, having won 3 premierships in the NRL rugby league era and 6 in total during their 23 year existence.Swimming is also a popular sport in Queensland, with a majority of Australian team members and international medalists hailing from the state. At the Summer Olympics, Queensland swimmers won all six of Australias gold medals, all swimmers on Australias three female (finals) relays teams were from Queensland, two of which won gold. Major professional teams include:* Football: Lions, Coast Suns* Basketball: Crocodiles, Taipans and the Coast Blaze* Cricket: Bulls, Heat* (soccer): Roar, Queensland Fury(no longer in the A-League) and Coast United* Netball: Firebirds* League:** Representative: Queensland Maroons** Clubs: Broncos, Coast Titans and the Queensland Cowboys** State Competition: Cup* Union: RedsEvents include:* Coast Indy 300* State of Origin* Queensland 400* Quicksilver Pro and Roxy ProSee also* Council of Unions* Day* Expatriate Awards* State Archives* Queensland floods* Nations Association of Australia (Queensland) Community AwardLists:* of Queensland* of highways in Queensland* of Queenslanders* of schools in Queensland* of Queensland* areas of QueenslandReferencesExternal links* Government of Queensland* Queensland State Archives* http://www.nma.gov.au/collections/richard_daintrees_glass_platesace:Queenslandaf:Queenslandang:Cwnelandar:zh-min-nan:Queenslandbe-x-old:br:Queenslandbg:ca:Queenslandcs:Queenslandcy:Queenslandda:Queenslandde:Queenslandet:Queenslandel:es:Queenslandeo:Kvinslandoeu:Queenslandfa:hif:Queenslandfr:Queenslandga:Queenslandgv:Queenslandgag:Queenslandgd:Queenslandgl:Queenslandgu:hi:hr:Queenslandio:Queenslandid:Queenslandos:is:Queenslandit:Queenslandhe:jv:Queenslandkn:pam:Queenslandka:Reginaelv:Kvnslendalb:Queenslandlt:Kvinslandaslij:Queenslandli:Queenslandhu:Queenslandmk:mr:ms:Queenslandmn:nl:Queenslandja:pih:Kwiinslandno:Queenslandnn:Queenslandoc:Queenslandpnb:pl:Queenslandpt:Queenslandro:Queenslandrm:Queenslandru:sah:stq:Queenslandsimple:Queenslandsk:Queenslandsl:Queenslandsr:sh:Queenslandfi:Queenslandsv:Queenslandtl:Queenslandta:th:tr:Queenslanduk:ug:vec:Queenslandvi:Queenslandwar:Queenslandwuu:yo:Queenslandzh-yue:zea:Queenslandzh:
60004
Ernest_Shackleton
 death_cause  Heart attackSir Ernest Henry Shackleton, CVO, OBE (15 February 1874  5 January 1922) was an Anglo-Irish explorer() who was one of the principal figures of the period known as the Age of Antarctic Exploration. His first experience of the polar regions was as third officer on Captain  Falcon Scotts Expedition, 190104, from which he was sent home early on health grounds. Determined to make amends for this perceived personal failure, he returned to Antarctica in 1907 as leader of the Expedition. In January 1909 he and three companions made a southern march which established a record South latitude at 8823S, 97 miles (114 miles, 190 km) from the Pole, by far the closest convergence in exploration history up to that time. For this achievement, Shackleton was knighted by Edward VII on his return home.After the race to the South Pole ended in 1912 with Amundsens conquest, Shackleton turned his attention to what he said was the one remaining great object of Antarctic journeyingthe crossing of the continent from sea to sea, via the pole. To this end he made preparations for what became the Trans-Antarctic Expedition, 191417. Disaster struck this expedition when its ship, Endurance, was trapped in ice and slowly crushed, before the shore parties could be landed. There followed a sequence of exploits, and an ultimate escape with no lives lost, that would eventually assure Shackletons heroic status, although this was not immediately evident.( In 1921 he went back to the Antarctic with the Expedition, intending to carry out a programme of scientific and survey activities. Before the expedition could begin this work Shackleton died of a heart attack while his ship, Quest, was moored in Georgia. At his wifes request he was buried there.Away from his expeditions, Shackletons life was generally restless and unfulfilled. In his search for rapid pathways to wealth and security he launched many business ventures and other money-making schemes, none of which prospered. His financial affairs were generally muddled; when he died he was heavily in debt. On his death he was lauded in the press, but was thereafter largely forgotten, while the heroic reputation of his rival Scott was sustained for many decades. At the end of the 20th century Shackleton was rediscovered,( and rapidly became a cult figure, a role model for leadership as one who, in extreme circumstances, kept his team together to accomplish a survival story which polar historian Stephanie Barczewski describes as incredible.(Early lifeFile:Dulwich College, College Road, Dulwich. - geograph.org.uk - 58443.jpg|thumb|right|College, South London (a modern photograph).ChildhoodErnest Shackleton was born on 15 February 1874, in Kilkea near Athy, Kildare, Ireland, about  from Dublin. Ernests father was Henry, and his mother was Henrietta Letitia Sophia Gavan.  His fathers family was Anglo-Irish, originally from Yorkshire.  His mothers family was Irish, from counties Cork and Kerry.(Byrne, James Patrick, Ireland and the Americas, ABC-CLIO, 2008, p 852.)   Ernest was the second of their ten children and the first of two sons; the second, Frank, would achieve notoriety as a suspect, later exonerated, in the 1907 theft of Irelands Crown Jewels.( In 1880, when Ernest was six, Henry Shackleton gave up his life as a landowner to study medicine at College, Dublin, moving his family into the city.( Four years later, the family moved again, from Ireland to Sydenham in suburban London. Partly this was in search of better professional prospects for the newly qualified doctor, but another factor may have been unease about their Anglo-Irish ancestry, following the assassination by Irish nationalists of Frederick Cavendish, the British Chief Secretary for Ireland, in 1882.(EducationFrom early childhood Shackleton was a voracious reader, which sparked a passion for adventure.( He was schooled by a governess until the age of eleven, when he began at Fir Lodge Preparatory School in West Hill, Dulwich in south east London. At the age of thirteen, he entered College.( The young Shackleton did not particularly distinguish himself as a scholar, and was said to be bored by his studies.( He was quoted later as saying: I never learned much geography at school....Literature, too, consisted in the dissection, the parsing, the analysing of certain passages from our great poets and prose-writers...teachers should be very careful not to spoil pupils taste for poetry for all time by making it a task and an imposition.( In his final term at the school, however, he was still able to achieve fifth place in his class of thirty-one.(Merchant Navy officerShackletons restlessness at school was such that he was allowed to leave at 16 and go to sea.( The options available were a Royal Naval cadetship at HMS Britannia, which Dr Shackleton could not afford, the mercantile marine cadet ships Worcester and Conway, or an apprenticeship before the mast on a sailing vessel. The third option was chosen.( His father was able to secure him a berth with the North Western Shipping Company, aboard the square-rigged sailing ship Hoghton Tower.( During the following four years at sea, Shackleton learned his trade, visiting the far corners of the earth and forming acquaintances with a variety of people from many walks of life, learning to be at home with all kinds of men.( In August 1894 he passed his examination for Mate and accepted a post as third officer on a steamer of the Welsh Shire Line.( Two years later he had obtained his Mates ticket, and in 1898 he was certified as a Master Mariner, which qualified him to command a British ship anywhere in the world.(In 1898 Shackleton joined the Line, the regular mail and passenger carrier between Southampton and Cape Town. He was, as a shipmate recorded, a departure from our usual type of young officer, content with his own company though not aloof, spouting lines from Keats and Browning, a mixture of sensitivity and aggression but, withal, sympathetic.( Following the outbreak of the War in 1899, Shackleton transferred to the troopship Tintagel Castle where, in March 1900, he met an army lieutenant, Cedric Longstaff, whose father W. Longstaff was the main financial backer of the Antarctic Expedition, then being organised in London.( Shackleton used his acquaintance with the son to obtain an interview with Longstaff senior, with a view to obtaining a place on the expedition. Longstaff, impressed by Shackletons keenness, recommended him to Clements Markham, the expeditions overlord, making it clear that he wanted Shackleton accepted.( On 17 February 1901 his appointment as third officer to the expeditions ship Discovery was confirmed; shortly afterwards he was commissioned a sub-lieutenant in the Naval Reserve.( Although officially he was given leave by Union-Castle, this was in fact the end of Shackletons Merchant Navy service.(Discovery Expedition, 190103File:Discoveryboat.jpg|thumb|The expedition ship Discovery in Antarctic waters.The National Antarctic Expedition, known as the Discovery Expedition after the ship Discovery, was the brainchild of Sir Clements Markham, president of the Geographical Society, and had been many years in preparation. It was led by Falcon Scott, a Royal Navy torpedo lieutenant lately promoted Commander,( and had objectives that included scientific and geographical discovery.( Although Discovery was not a Royal Navy unit, Scott required the crew, officers and scientific staff to accept voluntarily the conditions of the Naval Discipline Act, and the ship and expedition were run on Royal Navy lines.( Shackleton accepted this, even though his own background and instincts favoured a different, more informal style of leadership.( Shackletons particular duties were listed as: In charge of seawater analysis. Ward-room caterer. In charge of holds, stores and provisions ... He also arranges the entertainments.(Discovery departed London on 31 July 1901, arriving at the Antarctic coast, via Town and Zealand, on 8 January 1902. After landing, Shackleton took part in an experimental balloon flight on 4 February.( He also participated, with the scientists Edward Wilson and Hartley Ferrar, in the first sledging trip from the expeditions winter quarters in Sound, a journey which established a safe route on to the Great Ice Barrier.( During the Antarctic winter of 1902, in the confines of the iced-in Discovery, Shackleton edited the expeditions magazine The South Polar Times.( According to steward Hare, he was the most popular of the officers among the crew, being a good mixer,( though claims that this represented an unofficial rival leadership to Scotts are unsupported.( Scott chose Shackleton to accompany Wilson and himself on the expeditions southern journey, a march southwards to achieve the highest possible latitude in the direction of the South Pole. This march was not a serious attempt on the Pole, although the attainment of a high latitude was of great importance to Scott, and the inclusion of Shackleton indicated a high degree of personal trust.((falcon scott.jpg|thumb|upright|left|Captain ScottThe party set out on 2 November 1902. The march was, Scott wrote later, a combination of success and failure.( A record South latitude of 8217 was reached, beating the previous record established in 1900 by Borchgrevink.(Modern calculations, based on Shackletons photograph and Wilsons drawing, place the furthest point reached at 8211. (Crane pp214-5))( The journey was marred by the poor performance of the dogs, whose food had become tainted, and who rapidly fell sick.( All 22 dogs died during the march. The three men all suffered at times from snow blindness, frostbite and, ultimately, scurvy. On the return journey Shackleton had by his own admission broken down and could no longer carry out his share of the work.( He would later deny Scotts claim in The Voyage of the Discovery, that he had been carried on the sledge.( However, he was in a seriously weakened condition; Wilsons diary entry for 14 January reads: Shackleton has been anything but up to the mark, and today he is decidedly worse, very short winded and coughing constantly, with more serious symptoms that need not be detailed here but which are of no small consequence one hundred and sixty miles from the ship.On 4 February 1903 the party finally reached the ship. After a medical examination (which proved inconclusive),( Scott decided to send Shackleton home on the relief ship Morning, which had arrived in McMurdo Sound in January 1903. Scott wrote: He ought not to risk further hardship in his present state of health.( There is conjecture that Scotts motives for removing him was resentment of Shackletons popularity, and that ill-health was used as an excuse to get rid of him.( Years after the deaths of Scott, Wilson and Shackleton, Armitage, the expeditions second-in-command, claimed that there had been a falling-out on the southern journey, and that Scott had told the ships doctor that if he does not go back sick he will go back in disgrace.( There is no corroboration of Armitages story. Shackleton and Scott stayed on friendly terms, at least until the publication of Scotts account of the southern journey in The Voyage of the Discovery.( Although in public they remained mutually respectful and cordial,( according to biographer Roland Huntford, Shackletons attitude to Scott turned to smouldering scorn and dislike; salvage of wounded pride required a return to the Antarctic and an attempt to outdo Scott.(Between the Discovery and Nimrod expeditions, 190307After a period of convalescence in New Zealand, Shackleton returned to England via Francisco and New York.( As the first significant person to return from the Antarctic he found that he was in demand; in particular, the Admiralty wished to consult him about their further proposals for the rescue of Discovery.( With Sir Clements Markhams blessing he accepted a temporary post assisting the outfitting of the Terra Nova for the second Discovery relief operation but turned down the offer to sail with her as chief officer. He also assisted in the equipping of the Argentinian corvette Uruguay, which was being fitted out for the relief of the stranded  Antarctic Expedition under Nordenskild.( In search of more permanent employment, Shackleton applied for a regular commission in the Royal Navy, via the back-door route of the Supplementary List,( but despite the sponsorship of Markham and of the president of the Society he was not successful.( Instead, he became a journalist, working for the Magazine, but found this unsatisfactory.( He was then offered, and accepted, the secretaryship of the Scottish Geographical Society (RSGS), a post which he took up on 11 January 1904.(In 1905 Shackleton became a shareholder in a speculative company that aimed to make a fortune transporting Russian troops home from the Far East. Despite his assurances to Emily that we are practically sure of the contract nothing came of this scheme.( He also ventured into politics, unsuccessfully standing in the 1906 General Election as the Unionist Partys candidate for Dundee.(Shackleton stood as political candidate in Dundee but finished fourth of five candidates, with 3,865 votes to the victors 9,276. (Morrell, p. 32))( Meantime he had taken a job with wealthy Clydeside industrialist Beardmore (later Lord Invernairn), with a commission which involved interviewing prospective clients and entertaining Beardmores business friends.( Shackleton by this time, however, was making no secret of his ambition to return to Antarctica at the head of his own expedition.Beardmore was sufficiently impressed with Shackleton to offer financial support,(Beardmores help took the form of guaranteeing a loan at Clydesdale Bank, for 7,000 (2008 equivalent approx. 350,000), not through an outright gift. (Riffenburgh, p.106))(  but other donations proved hard to come by. Nevertheless, in February 1907 Shackleton presented his plans for an Antarctic expedition to the Royal Geographic Society, the details of which, under the name British Antarctic Expedition, were published in the Royal Societys newsletter, Geographic Journal.( The aim was the conquest of both the geographical South Pole and the Magnetic Pole. Shackleton then worked hard to persuade others of his wealthy friends and acquaintances to contribute, including Sir Lee Brocklehurst, who subscribed 2,000 (2008 equivalent 150,000) to secure a place on the expedition,(( author Campbell Mackellar, and Guinness baron Iveagh whose contribution was secured less than two weeks before the departure of the expedition ship Nimrod.(Nimrod Expedition (190709)File:TheSouthernParty.jpg|thumb|left|Expedition South Pole Party (left to right): Wild, Shackleton, Marshall and Adams.On 1 January 1908, Nimrod sailed for the Antarctic from Harbour, New Zealand. Shackletons original plans had envisaged using the old Discovery base in McMurdo Sound to launch his attempts on the South Pole and South Magnetic Pole.( However, before leaving England he had been pressured to give an undertaking to Scott that he would not base himself in the McMurdo area, which Scott was claiming as his own field of work. Shackleton reluctantly agreed to look for winter quarters either at the Barrier Inlet (which Discovery had briefly visited in 1902) or at King Edward VII Land.(To conserve coal, the ship was towed  by the steamer Koonya to the Antarctic ice, after Shackleton had persuaded the New Zealand government and the Union Steamship Company to share the cost.( In accordance with Shackletons promise to Scott the ship headed for the eastern sector of the Great Ice Barrier, arriving there on 21 January 1908. They found that the Barrier Inlet had expanded to form a large bay, in which were hundreds of whales, which led to the immediate christening of the area as the of Whales.( It was noted that ice conditions were unstable, precluding the establishment of a safe base there. An extended search for an anchorage at King Edward VII Land proved equally fruitless, so Shackleton was forced to break his undertaking to Scott and set sail for McMurdo Sound, a decision which, according to second officer Arthur Harbord, was dictated by common sense in view of the difficulties of ice pressure, coal shortage and the lack of any nearer known base.(Nimrod arrived at McMurdo Sound on 29 January, but was stopped by ice  north of Discoverys old base at Point.( After considerable weather delays, Shackletons base was eventually established at Royds, about  north of Hut Point. The party was in high spirits, despite the difficult conditions; Shackletons ability to communicate with each man kept the party happy and focused.(The Great Southern Journey,( as Wild called it, began on 19 October 1908. On 9 January 1909 Shackleton and three companions (Wild, Marshall and Adams) reached a new South latitude of 8823S, a point only  from the Pole.( En route the South Pole party discovered the Glacier, (named after Shackletons patron),( and became the first persons to see and travel on the South Polar Plateau.( Their return journey to McMurdo Sound was a race against starvation, on half-rations for much of the way. At one point Shackleton gave his one biscuit allotted for the day to the ailing Frank Wild, who wrote in his diary: All the money that was ever minted would not have bought that biscuit and the remembrance of that sacrifice will never leave me.( They arrived at Hut Point just in time to catch the ship.The expeditions other main accomplishments included the first ascent of Erebus, and the discovery of the approximate location of the South Magnetic Pole, reached on 16 January 1909 by David, Mawson, and Mackay.( Shackleton returned to the United Kingdom as a hero, and soon afterwards published his expedition account, The Heart of the Antarctic. Emily Shackleton later recorded: The only comment he made to me about not reaching the Pole was a live donkey is better than a dead lion, isnt it? and I said Yes darling, as far as I am concerned.(In 1910 Shackleton made a series of three recordings describing the expedition using an Edison Phonograph.(National Film and Sound Archive: Ernest Shackleton on australianscreen online)Several mostly intact cases of whisky and brandy left behind in 1909 were recovered in 2010, and will be analyzed by a distilling company for possible revival of the vintage (and since lost) formula for the particular brands found.()()()Between expeditions 190914embarked on an extensive lecture tour in which he talked not only about his own polar journeys but also those of Scott and Amundsen.Public heroOn Shackletons return home, public honours were quickly forthcoming. King Edward VII received him on 12 July and invested him as of the Royal Victorian Order;(( in the kings Birthday Honours list in November he was made a knight and thus became Sir Ernest Shackleton.(( He was honoured by the Royal Geographical Society, who awarded him a Gold Medala proposal that the medal be smaller than that earlier awarded to Captain Scott was not acted on.( All the members of the Nimrod Expedition shore party received silver Polar Medals.( Shackleton was also appointed a Younger Brother of House, a significant honour for British mariners.(Besides the official honours, Shackletons Antarctic feats were greeted in Britain with great enthusiasm. Proposing a toast to the explorer at a lunch given in Shackletons honour by the Royal Societies Club, Lord Halsbury, a former Chancellor, said: When one remembers what he had gone through, one does not believe in the supposed degeneration of the British race. One does not believe that we have lost all sense of admiration for courage and endurance.( The heroism was also claimed by Ireland: the Dublin Evening Telegraphs headline read South Pole Almost Reached By An Irishman,( while the Dublin Express spoke of the qualities that were his heritage as an Irishman.( Shackletons fellow-explorers expressed their admiration; Amundsen wrote, in a letter to RGS Secretary Scott Keltie that the English nation has by this deed of Shackletons won a victory that can never be surpassed.( Nansen sent an effusive private letter to Emily Shackleton, praising the unique expedition which has been such a complete success in every respect.( The reality was, however, that the expedition had left Shackleton deeply in debt, unable to meet the financial guarantees he had given to backers. Despite his efforts, it required government action, in the form of a grant of 20,000 (2008: 1.5 million) to clear the most pressing obligations. It is likely that many debts were not pressed and were written off.Biding timeIn the period immediately after his return, Shackleton engaged in a strenuous schedule of public appearances, lectures and social engagements. He then sought to cash in on his celebrity by making a fortune in the business world.( Among the ventures which he hoped to promote were a tobacco company,( a scheme for selling to collectors postage stamps overprinted King Edward VII Land (based on Shackletons appointment as Antarctic postmaster by the New Zealand authorities),( and the development of a Hungarian mining concession he had acquired near the city of Nagybanya, now part of Romania.( None of these enterprises prospered, and his main source of income was his earnings from lecture tours. He still harboured thoughts of returning south, even though in September 1910, having recently moved with his family to Sheringham in Norfolk, he wrote to Emily: I am never again going South and I have thought it all out and my place is at home now.( He had been in discussions with Douglas Mawson about a scientific expedition to the Antarctic coast between Adare and Gaussberg, and had written to the RGS about this in February 1910.(This expedition took place under Mawson, without Shackletons participation, as the Antarctic Expedition 191113. (Riffenburgh, p. 298.))(Any future resumption by Shackleton of the quest for the South Pole depended on the results of Scotts Nova Expedition, which left from Cardiff in July 1910. By the spring of 1912 the world was aware that the pole had been conquered, by the Norwegian Roald Amundsen. The fate of Scotts expedition was not then known. Shackletons mind turned to a project that had been announced, and then abandoned, by the Scottish explorer Speirs Bruce, for a continental crossing, from a landing in the Sea, via the South Pole to McMurdo Sound. Bruce, who had failed to acquire financial backing, was happy that Shackleton should adopt his plans,( which were similar to those being followed by the German explorer Filchner. Filchner had left Bremerhaven in May 1911; in December 1912 the news arrived from South Georgia that his expedition had failed.(Filchner was able to bring back geographical information that would be of much use to Shackleton, including the discovery of a possible landing site at Bay. (Huntford p.367))( The transcontinental journey, in Shackletons words, was the one great object of Antarctic journeyings remaining, now open to him.(Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition 191417File:Shackleton Endurance Aurora map2.png|thumb|Map of the sea routes of Endurance, the James Caird, and Aurora, the overland supply depot route of the Sea Party, and the planned overland route of the Sea Party led by Ernest Shackleton on his trans-Antarctic expedition of 191415:PreparationsShackleton published details of his new expedition, grandly titled the Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition, early in 1914. Two ships would be employed; Endurance would carry the main party into the Weddell Sea, aiming for Vahsel Bay from where a team of six, led by Shackleton, would begin the crossing of the continent. Meanwhile a second ship, the Aurora, would take a supporting party under Captain Mackintosh to McMurdo Sound on the opposite side of the continent. This party would then lay supply depots across the Great Ice Barrier as far as the Beardmore Glacier, these depots holding the food and fuel that would enable Shackletons party to complete their journey of  across the continent.(Shackleton used his considerable fund-raising skills, and the expedition was financed largely by private donations, although the British government gave 10,000 (about 680,000 in 2008 terms). Scottish jute magnate Sir James Caird gave 24,000, Midlands industrialist Dudley Docker gave 10,000 and tobacco heiress Stancomb-Wills gave an undisclosed but reportedly generous sum.( Public interest in the expedition was considerable; Shackleton received more than 5,000 applications to join it.( His interviewing and selection methods sometimes seemed eccentric; believing that character and temperament were as important as technical ability,( he would ask unconventional questions. Thus physicist Reginald James was asked if he could sing;( others were accepted on sight because Shackleton liked the look of them, or after the briefest of interrogations.( Shackleton also loosened some traditional hierarchies, expecting all men, including the scientists, to take their share of ships chores. He ultimately selected a crew of 56, twenty eight on each ship.(Despite the outbreak of the First World War on 3 August 1914, Endurance was directed by the Lord of the Admiralty, Churchill, to proceed,( and left British waters on 8 August. Shackleton delayed his own departure until 27 September, meeting the ship in Aires.(Crew  Whilst Shackleton led the expedition the Endurance was captained by Cpt. F. Worsley DSO. Lt. J. Stenhouse DSC captained the Aurora.On the Endurance the second in command was the experienced explorer, Frank Wild. The meteorologist was Cpt. L. Hussey (also an able banjo player). Dr. Mellroy was head of the scientific staff, which also included Mr. Wardie. Dr. Macklin was the vet, in charge of keeping the 70 dogs healthy. Tom Crean was in more immediate charge as head dog-handler. Other crew included Mr.James, Mr. Hussy, Greenstreet and Clerk (the biologist). Of later independent fame was the photographer Hurley.Dog names known are Samson, Hercules (the strongest), Smiler, Surly, and Sire.(Film South (1919) BFI (BFIVO54))Loss of EnduranceEndurance  departed from South Georgia for the Weddell Sea on 5 December, heading for Vahsel Bay. As the ship moved southward, early ice was encountered, which slowed progress. Deep in the Weddell Sea conditions gradually grew worse until, on 19 January 1915, Endurance became frozen fast in an ice floe.( On 24 February, realising that she would be trapped until the following spring, Shackleton ordered the abandonment of ships routine and her conversion to a winter station.( She drifted slowly northward with the ice through the following months.  When spring arrived in September the breaking of the ice and its later movements put extreme pressures on the ships hull.(Until this point Shackleton had hoped that the ship, when she was released from the ice, could work her way back towards Vahsel Bay. On 24 October, however, water began pouring in. After a few days, with the position at 6905S, 5130W, Shackleton gave the order to abandon ship, saying, Shes going down!; and men, provisions and equipment were transferred to camps on the ice.( On 21 November 1915, the wreck finally slipped beneath the surface.(For almost two months Shackleton and his party camped on a large, flat floe, hoping that it would drift towards Island, approximately  away, where it was known that stores were cached.( After failed attempts to march across the ice to this island, Shackleton decided to set up another more permanent camp (Patience Camp) on another floe, and trust to the drift of the ice to take them towards a safe landing.( By 17 March their ice camp was within  of Paulet Island( but, separated by impassable ice, they were unable to reach it. On 9 April their ice floe broke into two, and Shackleton ordered the crew into the lifeboats, to head for the nearest land.( After five harrowing days at sea the exhausted men landed their three lifeboats at Island, 346 miles from where the Endurance sank(South  (1919) BFIVO54). This was the first time they had stood on solid ground for 497 days.( Shackletons concern for his men was such that he gave his mittens to photographer Hurley, who had lost his during the boat journey. Shackleton suffered frostbitten fingers as a result.(The open-boat journeyFile:LaunchingTheJamesCaird2.jpg|thumb|Launching the James Caird from the shore of Island, 24 April 1916.Island was an inhospitable place, far from any shipping routes. Consequently, Shackleton decided to risk an open-boat journey to the 800 mile distant South Georgia whaling stations, where he knew help was available.( The strongest of the tiny twenty foot lifeboats, christened James Caird after the expeditions chief sponsor, was chosen for the trip.( Ships carpenter McNish made various improvements, including raising the sides, strengthening the keel, building a makeshift deck of wood and canvas, and sealing the work with oil paint and seal blood.( Shackleton chose five companions for the journey: Worsley, Endurances captain, who would be responsible for navigation; Tom Crean, who had begged to go; two strong sailors in John Vincent and Timothy McCarthy, and finally the carpenter McNish.( Shackleton had clashed with McNish during the time when the party was stranded on the ice, but, while he would not forgive the carpenters earlier insubordination, Shackleton recognised his value for this particular job.(For an account of McNishs mutiny, see (Huntford, pp. 47576). Despite McNishs heroics during the James Caird voyage, Shackleton refused to recommend him for the award of a Polar Medal  (Huntford, p. 656))((Shackleton refused to pack supplies for more than four weeks, knowing that if they did not reach South Georgia within that time, the boat and its crew would be lost.( The James Caird was launched on 24 April 1916; during the next fifteen days it sailed through the waters of the southern ocean, at the mercy of the stormy seas, in constant peril of capsizing. On 8 May, thanks to Worsleys navigational skills, the cliffs of South Georgia came into sight but hurricane-force winds prevented the possibility of landing. The party were forced to ride out the storm offshore, in constant danger of being dashed against the rocks. They would later learn that the same hurricane had sunk a 500-ton steamer bound for South Georgia from Buenos Aires.( On the following day they were able, finally, to land on the unoccupied southern shore. After a period of rest and recuperation, rather than risk putting to sea again to reach the whaling stations on the northern coast, Shackleton decided to attempt a land crossing of the island. Although it is likely that Norwegian whalers had previously crossed at other points on ski, no one had attempted this particular route before.( Leaving McNish, Vincent and McCarthy at the landing point on South Georgia, Shackleton travelled 32 miles (BFI South (1919))with Worsley and Crean over mountainous terrain for 36 hours to reach the whaling station at Stromness on May 20th.(The next successful crossing of South Georgia was in October 1955, by the British explorer Carse, who travelled much of the same route as Shackletons party. In tribute to their achievement he wrote: I do not know how they did it, except that they had tothree men of the heroic age of Antarctic exploration with 50 feet of rope between themand a carpenters adze.(RescueFile:AllSafeAllWell.jpg|thumb|All Safe, All Well, allegedly depicting Shackletons return to Elephant Island, August 1916. However, a photograph of the departure of the James Caird in April was doctored by photographer Hurley to create this image.(Shackleton immediately sent a boat to pick up the three men from the other side of South Georgia while he set to work to organise the rescue of the Elephant Island men, who had been isolated there for four and a half months. His first three attempts were foiled by sea ice, which blocked the approaches to the island. He appealed to the Chilean government, which offered the use of Yelcho, a small seagoing tug from its navy. Yelcho reached Elephant Island on 30 August, and Shackleton quickly evacuated all 22 men.( The Yelcho took the crew to Valparaiso in Chile where crowds warmly welcomed them back to civilisation.There remained the men of the Sea Party, who were stranded at Evans in McMurdo Sound, after Aurora had been blown from its anchorage and driven out to sea, unable to return. The ship, after a drift of many months, had returned to New Zealand. Shackleton travelled there to join Aurora, and sailed with her to the rescue of the Ross Sea party. This group, despite many hardships, had carried out its depot-laying mission to the full, but three lives had been lost, including that of its commander, Mackintosh.(World War IShackleton returned to England in May 1917, while Europe was in the midst of War I. He suffered from a heart condition, most likely made worse by the fatigue of his arduous journeys. He was too old to be conscripted, but nevertheless he volunteered for the army, repeatedly requesting to be sent to the front in France.( He was by now drinking heavily.(( In October 1917 he was sent to Aires to boost British propaganda in South America. Unqualified as a diplomat, he nevertheless tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade Argentina and Chile to enter the war on the side of the Allies.(  He returned home in April 1918.Shackleton was then briefly involved in a mission to Spitsbergen, the purpose of which was to establish a British presence there, in the guise of a mining operation.( On the way there, in Troms, he was taken ill, possibly with a heart attack; in any event he was required to return home, as he had been commissioned into the army and appointed to a military expedition to Murmansk, in northern Russia.( The Armistice was signed on 11 November 1918, and four months later, in March 1919, Shackleton returned home. He was full of plans, however, for the economic development of Northern Russia, and began seeking capital to this end. These plans foundered as the region fell to the Bolsheviks.( Shackleton returned to the lecture circuit, and in December 1919 published South, his own account of the Endurance expedition.( For his war effort in North Russia, Shackleton was appointed an of the Order of the British Empire (OBE).(Final expedition and deathFile:Shackletons Ship Quest 1921.JPG|thumb|Quest, passing through  Bridge, London.In 1920, tired of the lecture circuit, Shackleton began to consider the possibility of a last expedition. He thought seriously of going to the Sea area of the Arctic, a largely unexplored region, and raised some interest in this idea from the Canadian government.( With funds supplied by a former schoolfriend Quiller Rowett he acquired a 125 ton Norwegian sealer, named Foca I which he renamed Quest.(() The plan changed; the destination became the Antarctic, and the project was defined by Shackleton as an oceanographic and sub-antarctic expedition.( The goals of the venture were imprecise, but a circumnavigation of the Antarctic continent and investigation of some lost sub-Antarctic islands were mentioned as objectives.( Rowett agreed to finance the entire expedition, which became known as the Expedition, and which left England on 24 September 1921.(Although some of his former crew members had not received all of their pay from the Endurance expedition, many of them signed on with their former Boss.( When the party arrived in de Janeiro, Shackleton suffered a suspected heart attack.( He refused a proper medical examination and would not seek treatment, so Quest continued south, and on 4 January 1922 arrived at Georgia.File:Shackleton Grave SouthGeorgia.jpg|thumb|upright|left|Sir Ernest Shackletons grave in Grytviken, Georgia.In the early hours of the next morning Shackleton summoned the expeditions physician, Macklin,( to his cabin, complaining of back pains and other discomfort. According to Macklins own account, Macklin told him he had been overdoing things and should try to lead a more regular life, to which Shackleton answered: You are always wanting me to give up things, what is it I ought to give up? Chiefly alcohol, Boss, replied Macklin. A few moments later, at 2:50 a.m. on 5 January 1922, Shackleton suffered a fatal heart attack.(Macklin, who conducted the autopsy, concluded that the cause of death was atheroma of the coronary arteries exacerbated by overstrain during a period of debility.( Hussey, a veteran of the Imperial Trans-Antarctic expedition, offered to accompany the body back to Britain; however, while he was in Montevideo en route to England, a message was received from Emily Shackleton asking that her husband be buried in South Georgia. Hussey returned  to South Georgia with the body on the steamer Woodville, and on 5 March 1922 Shackleton was buried in the Grytviken cemetery, South Georgia, after a short service in the Lutheran church.( Macklin wrote in his diary: I think this is as the Boss would have had it himself, standing lonely in an island far from civilisation, surrounded by stormy tempestuous seas, & in the vicinity of one of his greatest exploits.LegacyBefore the return of Shackletons body to South Georgia, there was a memorial service held for him with full military honours at Holy Trinity Church, Montevideo, and on 2 March a service was held at Pauls Cathedral, London, at which the King and other members of the royal family were represented.( Within a year the first biography, The Life of Sir Ernest Shackleton, by Robert Mill, was published. This book, as well as being a tribute to the explorer, was a practical effort to assist his family; Shackleton died some 40,000 in debt (2008: 1.5 million).((Huntford, p. 692) A further initiative was the establishment of a Shackleton Memorial Fund, which was used to assist the education of his children and the support of his mother.(File:ShackletonStatue.JPG|thumb|upright|The statue of Sir Ernest Shackleton, outside the London headquarters of the Geographical Society.During the ensuing decades Shackletons status as a polar hero was generally outshone by that of Captain Scott. Scotts polar party had by 1925 been commemorated in Britain alone by more than 30 monuments, including stained glass windows, statues, busts and memorial tablets.( A statue of Shackleton designed by Edwin Lutyens was unveiled at the Royal Geographical Societys Kensington headquarters in 1932,( but public memorials to Shackleton were relatively few. Likewise, the printed word saw much more attention given to Scotta forty-page booklet on Shackleton, published in 1943 by OUP as part of a Great Exploits series, is described by cultural historian Stephanie Barczewski as a lone example of a popular literary treatment of Shackleton in a sea of similar treatments of Scott. This disparity continued into the 1950s.(In 1959 Alfred Lansings Endurance: Shackletons Incredible Voyage was published. This was the first of a number of books about Shackleton that began to appear, showing him in a highly positive light. At the same time, attitudes towards Scott were gradually changing as a more critical note was sounded in the literature, culminating in Huntfords 1979 treatment of him in his dual biography Scott and Amundsen, described by Barczewski as a devastating attack.( This negative picture of Scott became accepted as the popular truth( as the kind of heroism that Scott represented fell victim to the cultural shifts of the late twentieth century.( Within a few years he was thoroughly overtaken in public esteem by Shackleton, whose popularity surged while that of his erstwhile rival declined. In 2002, in a BBC poll conducted to determine the 100 Greatest Britons, Shackleton was ranked eleventh while Scott was down in 54th place.(In 2001 Margaret Morrell and Stephanie Capparell presented Shackleton as a model for corporate leadership in their book Shackletons Way: Leadership Lessons from the Great Antarctic Explorer. They wrote: Shackleton resonates with executives in todays business world. His people-centred approach to leadership can be a guide to anyone in a position of authority.( Other management writers were soon following this lead, using Shackleton as an examplar for bringing order to chaos. The Centre for Leadership Studies at the of Exeter (United Kingdom) offers a course on Shackleton, who also features in the management education programmes of several American universities.( In Boston USA a Shackleton School was set up on Bound principles, with the motto The Journey is Everything.( Shackleton has also been cited as a model leader by the Navy, and in a textbook on Congressional leadership, Peter L Steinke calls Shackleton the archetype of the nonanxious leader whose calm, reflective demeanor becomes the antibiotic warning of the toxicity of reactive behaviour.( The Athy Heritage Centre-Museum, Athy, County Kildare, Ireland established in 2001 the Ernest Shackleton Autumn School, which is held annually, to honour the memory of Ernest Shackleton and to commemorate the era of heroic polar exploration.Shackletons death marked the end of the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration, a period of discovery characterised by journeys of geographical and scientific exploration in a largely unknown continent without any of the benefits of modern travel methods or radio communication. In the preface to his book Worst Journey in the World, Cherry-Garrard, one of Scotts team on the Terra Nova Expedition, wrote: For a joint scientific and geographical piece of organisation, give me Scott; for a Winter Journey, Wilson; for a dash to the Pole and nothing else, Amundsen: and if I am in the devil of a hole and want to get out of it, give me Shackleton every time.(In 2002, 4 produced Shackleton, a serial depicting the 1914 expedition with Branagh in the title role. Broadcast in the United States on the Network, it won an Emmy and other awards.() On 15 February 2011 the 137th anniversary of Shackletons birth was celebrated with a Google Doodle on the search companys homepage.() In 2011, a biscuit that Shackleton handed to a starving fellow traveller on the 190709 Nimrod expedition sold at auction in London for 1,250 pounds at Christies.()See also* Shackleton  British long-range maritime patrol aircraft used by the Air Force, named after him* (crater)  crater that lies at the south pole of the Moon* Man factor  refers to the reported situations where an unseen presence such as a spirit provided comfort or support during traumatic experiences.NotesReferencesrefs(Alexander 1998, p. 16)(Alexander 1998, p. 137)(Alexander 1998, pp. 16669, pp.18285)(Alexander 1998, p. 192)(Alexander 1998, p. 193)(Alexander 1998, pp. 20203)(Barczewski 2007 p. 146)(Barczewski 2007, p. 209)(Barczewski 2007 p. 282)(Barczewski 2007, p. 283)(Barczewski 2007, p. 292)(Barczewski 2007 pp. 29495)(Barczewski 2007 p. 295)(Crane 2005, pp. 17172)(Crane 2005, p. 205)(Crane 2005, p. 310)Huntford(Crane 2005, pp. 21415)(Fiennes 2003, p. 35)(Fiennes 2003, p. 78)(Fiennes 2003, p. 83)(Fiennes 2003, pp. 10102)(Fiennes 2003, p. 104)(Fiennes 2003, p. 432)(Fisher 1957, pp.1920)(Fisher 1957, p. 23)(Fisher 1957, p. 58)(Fisher 1957, pp. 7880)(Fisher 1957, pp. 9798)(Fisher 1957, p. 99)(Fisher 1957, pp. 24243)(Fisher 1957, p. 251)(Fisher 1957  p. 263)(Fisher 1957, p. 272)(Fisher 1957, pp. 28485)(Fisher 1957, p. 308)(Fisher 1957, p. 311-315)(Fisher 1957, p. 312)(Churchill sent Shackleton a one-word telegram on 3 August   Proceed. Fisher, p. 324)(Fisher 1957, 324325)(Fisher 1957, p. 366)(Fisher 1957, p. 386)(Fisher 1957, pp. 43940)(Fisher 1957, pp. 441446)(Fisher 1957, pp. 47678)(Fisher 1957, pp. 48183)(Fisher 1957, p. 485)(Fisher 1957, pp. 48687)(Huntford 1985, pp. 69)(Huntford 1985, p. 11)(Huntford 1985, pp. 1318)(Huntford 1985, pp. 2023)(Huntford 1985, pp. 2530)(Huntford 1985, p. 42)(Huntford 1985, p. 76)(Huntford 1985, pp. 11418)(Huntford 1985, pp. 11920)(Huntford 1985, p. 123)(Huntford 1985, pp. 12428)(Huntford 1985, pp. 14344)(Huntford 1985, pp. 22728)(Huntford 1985, pp29899)(Huntford 1985, p. 300)(Huntford 1985, p. 312)(Huntford 1985, pp. 32326)(Huntford 1985, pp. 35152)(Huntford 1985, p. 367)(Huntford 1985, pp. 37577)(Huntford 1985, p. 386)(Huntford 1985, p.475)(Huntford 1985, p. 574)(Huntford 1985, pp. 63441)(Huntford 1985, p. 649)(Huntford 1985, p. 653)(Huntford 1985, pp. 65859)(Huntford 1985, pp. 66163)(Huntford 1985, pp. 67172)(Huntford 1985, p.656)(Huntford 1985, p. 684)(Huntford 1985, p. 687)(Jones 2003 p. 289)(Jones 2003, pp. 29596)(Kimmell, pp. 45)()()()(Mill 1923, Appendix)(Mill 1923, pp. 24, 7280, 104115, 150)(Mills 1999, p. 72)(Mills 1999, pp. 8286)(Mills 1999, p. 90)(Mills 1999, p. 108)(Morrell p. 32)(Perkins 2000, p, 36)(Preston 1997, p. 68)(Riffenburgh 2005, p. 106)(Riffenburgh 2005, p. 108)(Riffenburgh 2005, pp. 11016)(Riffenburgh 2005, p. 130)(Riffenburgh 2005, pp. 14344)(Riffenburgh 2005, pp. 15153)(Riffenburgh 2005, pp. 15767)(Riffenburgh 2005, pp. 18586)(Riffenburgh 2005, p. 244)(Riffenburgh 2005 p. 298)(Savours 2001, p. 9)(Shackleton: Heart of the Antarctic, p. 210. The distance from the Pole is commonly given as 97 or 98 miles, this being the distance in nautical miles.)(Shackleton 1982, preface pp. xiixv)(Shackleton 1982, pp. 2930)Fisher,(Shackleton 1982, p. 36)(Shackleton 1982, pp. 6366)(Shackleton 1982, pp. 7576)(Shackleton 1982, p. 98)(Shackleton 1982, p. 100)(Shackleton 1982, p. 106)(Shackleton 1982, pp. 12122)(Shackleton 1982, p. 143)(Wheeler 2001, pp. 187)(Wilson 1975, p. 111)(Wilson 1975, pp. 115118)(Worsley 1931, pp. 9599)(Worsley 1931, p. 162)(Worsley 1931, pp. 21112)Sources********************Further reading****** External links *Sir Ernest Shackleton, 18741922 indigo.ie. Site managed on behalf of Shackleton family* * * *History, Distilled New York Times article on the whisky recovered in 2010*Images of Shackleton from the Polar Research Institute at the University of Cambridge* Listen to Ernest Shackleton describing his 1908 South Pole Expedition, and read more about the recording on online.* The recording describing Shackletons 1908 South Pole Expedition was added to the Film and Sound Archives Sounds of Australia Registry in 2007*Ernest Shackleton and dogs on Nimrod back from expedition to reach Antarctica, 1909 (photo by Philip Brocklehurst)*Ernest Shackleton speaking on Antarctic attempt(archive.org  Free download)ShackletonShackletonHenry ShackletonShackletonShackletonShackletonShackletonShackletonShackletonShackletonShackletonShackletonHenry Shackletonekltons Shackletonja:ShackletonShackletonShackletonShackletonHenry ShackletonShackletonShackletonHenry ShackletonShackletonShackletonShackleton Shackletonzh:
60891
Surveying
File:us land survey officer.jpg|thumb|300px|US Navy Surveyor at work with a instrument.of Surveying, Cyclopaedia, Volume 2.jpg|thumb|right|300px|Table of Surveying, 1728 CyclopaediaSurveying or land surveying is the technique, profession and science of accurately determining the terrestrial or three-dimensional position of points and the distances and angles between them. These points are usually on the surface of the Earth, and they are often used to establish land maps and boundaries for ownership or governmental purposes.To accomplish their objective, surveyors use elements of geometry, engineering, trigonometry, mathematics, physics, and law.An alternative definition, per the Congress on Surveying and Mapping (ACSM), is the science and art of making all essential measurements to determine the relative position of points and/or physical and cultural details above, on, or beneath the surface of the Earth, and to depict them in a usable form, or to establish the position of points and/or details.Furthermore, as alluded to above, a particular type of surveying known as land surveying (also per ACSM) is the detailed study or inspection, as by gathering information through observations, measurements in the field, questionnaires, or research of legal instruments, and data analysis in the support of planning, designing, and establishing of property boundaries. It involves the re-establishment of cadastral surveys and land boundaries based on documents of record and historical evidence, as well as certifying surveys (as required by statute or local ordinance) of subdivision plats/maps, registered land surveys, judicial surveys, and space delineation. Land surveying can include associated services such as mapping and related data accumulation, construction layout surveys, precision measurements of length, angle, elevation, area, and volume, as well as horizontal and vertical control surveys, and the analysis and utilization of land survey data.Surveying has been an essential element in the development of the human environment since the beginning of recorded history (about 5,000 years ago). It is required in the planning and execution of nearly every form of construction. Its most familiar modern uses are in the fields of transport, building and construction, communications, mapping, and the definition of legal boundaries for land ownership. History of surveying File:Tkkstudentsbackinthedays.jpg|right|thumb|250px|Surveying students with professor at the University of Technology in the early 20th century.Surveying techniques have existed throughout much of recorded history. In Egypt, when the River overflowed its banks and washed out farm boundaries, boundaries were re-established by a stretcher, or surveyor, through the application of simple geometry. Thenearly perfect squareness and north-south orientation of the Pyramid of Giza, built c. 2700 BC, affirm the Egyptians command of surveying.A brief history of surveying:*The Egyptian land register (3000 BC).*A recent reassessment of Stonehenge (c. 2500 BC) suggests that the monument was set out by prehistoric surveyors using peg and rope geometry.(Johnson, Anthony, Solving Stonehenge: The New Key to an Ancient Enigma. (Thames & Hudson, 2008) ISBN 978-0-500-05155-9)*The surveying instrument originated in Mesopotamia (early 1st millennium BC).()*Under the Romans, land surveyors were established as a profession, and they established the basic measurements under which the Roman Empire was divided, such as a tax register of conquered lands (300 AD).*The rise of the Caliphate led to extensive surveying throughout the Arab Empire. Arabic surveyors invented a variety of specialized instruments for surveying, including:(Routledge Hill (1996), Engineering, pp. 766-9, in )**Instruments for accurate leveling: A wooden board with a line and two hooks, an triangle with a plumb line and two hooks, and a reed level.**A rotating alhidade, used for accurate alignment.**A surveying astrolabe, used for alignment, measuring angles, triangulation, finding the width of a river, and the distance between two points separated by an impassable obstruction.*In England, The Book by William the Conqueror (1086)**covered all England**contained names of the land owners, area, land quality, and specific information of the areas content and inhabitants.**did not include maps showing exact locationsIn the 18th century in Europe triangulation was used to build a hierarchy of networks to allow point positioning within a country. Highest in the hierarchy were triangulation networks. These were densified into networks of traverses (polygons), into which local mapping surveying measurements, usually with measuring tape, corner prism and the familiar red and white poles, are tied. For example, in the late 1780s, a team from the Survey of Great Britain, originally under General Roy began the Triangulation of Britain using the specially built theodolite. Large scale surveys are known as geodetic surveys.*Continental Europes Cadastre was created in 1808**founded by Napoleon I (Bonaparte)**contained numbers of the parcels of land (or just land), land usage, names etc., and value of the land**100 million parcels of land, triangle survey, measurable survey, map scale: 1:2500 and 1:1250**spread fast around Europe, but faced problems especially in Mediterranean countries, Balkan, and Eastern Europe due to cadastre upkeep costs and troubles.A cadastre loses its value if register and maps are not constantly updated.Because of the fundamental value of land and real estate to the local and global economy, land surveying was one of the first professions to require Professional Licensure. In many jurisdictions, the land surveyors license was the first Professional Licensure issued by the state, province, or federal government.Surveying techniquesImage:Brunton.JPG|thumb|A standard Brunton Geo compass, still used commonly today by geologists and surveyors for field-based measurements.File:Field-Map birdie.jpg|thumb|right|Example of modern equipment for surveying (Field-Map technology): GPS, rangefinder and field computer allows surveying as well as cartography (creation of map in real-time) and field data collection.Historically, distances were measured using a variety of means, such as with chains having links of a known length, for instance a chain, or measuring tapes made of steel or invar. To measure horizontal distances, these chains or tapes were pulled taut according to temperature, to reduce sagging and slack. Additionally, attempts to hold the measuring instrument level would be made. In instances of measuring up a slope, the surveyor might have to break (break chain) the measurement- use an increment less than the total length of the chain.Historically, horizontal angles were measured using a compass, which would provide a magnetic bearing, from which deflections could be measured. This type of instrument was later improved, with more carefully scribed discs providing better angular resolution, as well as through mounting telescopes with reticles for more-precise sighting atop the disc (see theodolite). Additionally, levels and calibrated circles allowing measurement of vertical angles were added, along with verniers for measurement to a fraction of a degreesuch as with a turn-of-the-century transit.The simplest method for measuring height is with an altimeter &mdash; basically a barometer &mdash; using air pressure as an indication of height. But surveying requires greater precision. A variety of means, such as precise levels (also known as differential leveling), have been developed to do this.  With precise leveling, a series of measurements between two points are taken using an instrument and a measuring rod.  Differentials in height between the measurements are added and subtracted in a series to derive the net difference in elevation between the two endpoints of the series.  With the advent of the Positioning System (GPS), elevation can also be derived with sophisticated satellite receivers, but usually with somewhat less accuracy than with traditional precise leveling.  However, the accuracies may be similar if the traditional leveling would have to be run over a long distance.Triangulation is another method of horizontal location made almost obsolete by GPS.  With the triangulation method, distances, elevations and directions between objects at great distance from one another can be determined.  Since the early days of surveying, this was the primary method of determining accurate positions of objects for topographic maps of large areas.  A surveyor first needs to know the horizontal distance between two of the objects.  Then the height, distances and angular position of other objects can be derived, as long as they are visible from one of the original objects.  High-accuracy transits or theodolites were used for this work, and angles between objects were measured repeatedly for increased accuracy.Turning is a term used when referring to moving the level to take a elevation shot in a different location.  When land surveying, there may be trees or other obstructions blocking the view from the level gun to the level rod.  In order to turn the level gun, you mush first take a shot on the rod from your current location and record the elevation.  Keeping the level rod in the exact same location and elevation you may move the level gun to a different location where the level rod is still visible.  Record the new elevation seen from the new location of the level rod and use the difference in elevations to find the new elevation of the level gun.  Turning is not only used when there are obstructions in the way, but also when drastically changing elevations.  you can turn up or down in elevation but the gun must always be at a higher elevation than the base of the rod.  A level rod can usually be raised up to 25 feet high which enables the gun to be set much higher.  However, if the gun is lower than the base of the rod, you will not be able to take a shot because the rod cannot be lowered beyond the ground elevation.Surveying equipmentFile:Bundesarchiv Bild 183-S12054, Vermessungstruppe bei Fernaufnahmen.jpg|thumb|A German engineer surveying during the World War, 1918As late as the 1990s, the basic tools used in planar surveying were a tape measure for determining shorter distances, a level to determine height or elevation differences, and a theodolite, set on a tripod, to measure angles (horizontal and vertical), combined with the process of triangulation. Starting from a position with known location and elevation, the distance and angles to the unknown point are measured.A more modern instrument is a station, which is a theodolite with an electronic distance measurement device (EDM). A total station can also be used for leveling when set to the horizontal plane. Since their introduction, total stations have made the technological shift from being optical-mechanical devices to being fully electronic.Modern top-of-the-line total stations no longer require a reflector or prism (used to return the light pulses used for distancing) to return distance measurements, are fully robotic, and can even e-mail point data to the office computer and connect to positioning systems, such as a Positioning System. Though real-time kinematic GPS systems have increased the speed of surveying, they are still horizontally accurate to only about 20 mm and vertically accurate to about 3040 mm.(National Cooperative Highway Research Program: Collecting, Processing and Integrating GPS data into GIS, p. 40. Published by Transportation Research Board, 2002 ISBN 0309069165, 9780309069168)Total stations are still used widely, along with other types of surveying instruments. However, GPS systems do not work well in areas with dense tree cover or constructions. One-person robotic-guided total stations allow surveyors to gather precise measurements without extra workers to look through and turn the telescope or record data. A faster but expensive way to measure large areas (not details, and no obstacles) is with a helicopter, equipped with a laser scanner, combined with a GPS to determine the position and elevation of the helicopter. To increase precision, surveyors place beacons on the ground (about  apart). This method reaches precisions between 540 cm (depending on flight height).(Toni Schenk1, Suyoung Seo, Beata Csatho: Accuracy Study of Airborne Laser Scanning Data with Photogrammetry, p. 118)Types of surveys and applicability* ALTA/ACSM Survey: a surveying standard jointly proposed by the Land Title Association and the Congress on Surveying and Mapping that incorporates elements of the boundary survey, mortgage survey, and topographic survey.* survey: used to accurately assess the relationship of archaeological sites in a landscape or to accurately record finds on an archaeological site.* As-built survey: a survey carried out during or immediately after a construction project for record, completion evaluation and payment purposes. An as-built survey also known as a works as executed survey documents the location of the recently constructed elements that are subject to completion evaluation. As built surveys are typically presented in red or redline and overlayed over existing design plans for direct comparison with design information.* Bathymetric survey: a survey carried out to map the topography and features of the bed of an ocean, lake, river or other body of water.* Boundary survey: a survey that establishes boundaries of a parcel using its legal description, which typically involves the setting or restoration of monuments or markers at the corners or along the lines of the parcel, often in the form of iron rods, pipes, or concrete monuments in the ground, or nails set in concrete or asphalt.* Deformation survey: a survey to determine if a structure or object is changing shape or moving. The three-dimensional positions of specific points on an object are determined, a period of time is allowed to pass, these positions are then re-measured and calculated, and a comparison between the two sets of positions is made.* Engineering surveys: those surveys associated with the engineering design (topographic, layout and as-built) often requiring geodetic computations beyond normal civil engineering practise.* Foundation survey: a survey done to collect the positional data on a foundation that has been poured and is cured. This is done to ensure that the foundation was constructed in the location, and at the elevation, authorized in the plot plan, site plan, or subdivision plan.* Geological survey: generic term for a survey conducted for the purpose of recording the geologically significant features of the area under investigation. .* Hydrographic survey: a survey conducted with the purpose of mapping the coastline and seabed for navigation, engineering, or resource management purposes.* Measured survey : a building survey to produce plans of the building. such a survey may be conducted before  renovation works, for commercial purpose, or at end of the construction process as built survey* Mortgage survey or physical survey: a simple survey that delineates land boundaries and building locations. In many places a mortgage survey is required by lending institutions as a precondition for a mortgage loan.* Soil survey, or soil mapping, is the process of determining the soil types or other properties of the soil cover over a landscape, and mapping them for others to understand and use.* Structural survey: a detailed inspection to report upon the physical condition and structural stability of a building or other structure and to highlight any work needed to maintain it in good repair.* Tape survey: this type of survey is the most basic and inexpensive type of land survey. Popular in the middle part of the 20th century, tape surveys while being accurate for distance lack substantially in their accuracy of measuring angle and bearing. Standards that are practiced by professional land surveyors.* Topographic survey: a survey that measures the elevation of points on a particular piece of land, and presents them as lines on a plot. Surveying as a career File:NainSingh.gif|thumb|right|The (explorer) cartographer Singh Rawat (19th century) received a Geographical Society gold medal in 1876.Image:All female survey crew - Minidoka Project, Idaho 1918.jpg|thumb|An all-female surveying crew in Idaho, 1918The basic principles of surveying have changed little over the ages, but the tools used by surveyors have evolved tremendously. Engineering, especially engineering, depends heavily on surveyors.Whenever there are roads, railways, reservoir, dams, walls, bridges or residential areas to be built, surveyors are involved. They establish the boundaries of legal descriptions and the boundaries of various lines of political divisions. They also provide advice and data for geographical information systems (GIS), computer databases that contain data on land features and boundaries.Surveyors must have a thorough knowledge of algebra, basic calculus, geometry, and trigonometry. They must also know the laws that deal with surveys, property, and contracts.In addition, they must be able to use delicate instruments with and precision. In the United States, surveyors and civil engineers use units of feet wherein a survey foot is broken down into 10ths and 100ths. Many deed descriptions requiring distance calls are often expressed using these units (125.25 ft). On the subject of accuracy, surveyors are often held to a standard of one one-hundredth of a foot; about 1/8 inch. Calculation and mapping tolerances are much smaller wherein achieving near-perfect closures are desired. Though tolerances such as this will vary from project to project, in the field and day to day usage beyond a 100th of a foot is often impractical.In most of the United States, surveying is recognized as a distinct profession apart from engineering. Licensing requirements vary by state, but they generally have components of education, experience and examinations. In the past, experience gained through an apprenticeship, together with passing a series of state-administered examinations, was required to attain licensure. Now, most states insist upon basic qualification of a degree in surveying, plus experience and examination requirements.The licensing process typically follows two phases. First, upon graduation, the candidate may be eligible to take the Fundamentals of Land Surveying exam, to be certified upon passing and meeting all other requirements as a surveyor in training (SIT). Upon being certified as an SIT, the candidate then needs to gain additional experience to become eligible for the second phase. That typically consists of the Principles and Practice of Land Surveying exam along with a state-specific examination.Licensed surveyors usually denote themselves with the letters P.S. (professional surveyor), L.S. (land surveyor), P.L.S. (professional land surveyor), R.L.S. (registered land surveyor), R.P.L.S. (Registered Professional Land Surveyor), or P.S.M. (professional surveyor and mapper) following their names, depending upon the dictates of their particular jurisdiction of registration.In Canada, land Surveyors are registered to work in their respective province. The designation for a land surveyor breaks down by province, but follows the rule whereby the first letter indicates the province, followed by L.S. There is also a designation as a C.L.S. or Canada lands surveyor, who has the authority to work on Lands, which include Indian Reserves, National Parks, the three territories and offshore lands.In many Commonwealth countries, the term Chartered Land Surveyor is used for someone holding a professional license to conduct surveys.A licensed land surveyor is typically required to sign and seal all plans, the format of which is dictated by their state jurisdiction, which shows their name and registration number. In many states, when setting boundary corners land surveyors are also required to place monuments bearing their registration numbers, typically in the form of capped iron rods, concrete monuments, or nails with washers.Building surveyingBuilding surveying emerged in the 1970s as a profession in the United Kingdom by a group of technically minded Practice Surveyors.(http://www.fig.net/pub/athens/papers/ts12/TS12_4_Kibblewhite_Wilkinson.pdf) Building surveying is a recognised profession in Britain, Ireland, Australia and Hong Kong. In Australia in particular, due to risk mitigation and limitation factors, the employment of surveyors at all levels of the construction industry is widespread. There are still many countries where it is not widely recognized as a profession.Building Surveyors are trained to some extent in all aspects of property but with specific training in Building Pathology, as such they have a wide understanding of the end implications of decisions taken by more specific professions and trades during the realisation process, thus making them ideal Project and Property Managers on the client side. Services that building surveyors undertake are broad but can include:*Construction design and building works*Project management and monitoring*Property Legislation advice*Insurance assessment and claims assistance*Defect investigation and maintenance advice*Building surveys and measured surveys*Handling planning applications*Building inspection to ensure compliance with building regulations*Pre-acquisition surveys*Negotiating dilapidations claims(http://hp1.gcal.ac.uk/pls/portal30/my_gcal.Progcat_Pkg.ProgPage?gtypeUG&p_CourseBSBS)Building surveyors also advise on many aspects of construction including:* design* cost* maintenance* sustainability* repair* refurbishment* restoration and preservation of buildings and monuments(http://www.prospects.ac.uk/cms/ShowPage/Home_page/Explore_types_of_jobs/Types_of_Job/p!eipaL?idno121&stateshowocc)Clients of a building surveyor can be the government agencies, businesses and individuals. Surveyors work closely with architects, planners, quantity surveyors, engineers, homeowners and tenants groups. A building surveyor may be called to act as an witness. It is usual for building surveyors to earn a college degree before undertaking structured training to become a member of a professional organisation.With the enlargement of the European community, the profession of the building surveyor is becoming more widely known in other European states, particularly France,(http://www.surveyorsinfrance.com) where many English-speaking people buy second homes.Lidar Surveying - Three-dimensional laser scanning provides high definition surveying for architectural, as-built, and engineering surveys. Recent technological advances make it the most cost-effective and time-sensitive solution for providing the highest level of detail available for interior and exterior building work.Land surveyorThe job of the land surveyor is to find and mark certain locations on land.  A typical location of interest, for example, is the boundary of a persons property.  That boundary is described in legal documents and the land surveyor follows that description and locates the boundary on the physical land and marks it, so the owner knows what land he can legally use.  As an example, such a legal description may refer to a point as being 120.25 feet south of some existing marker.  The land surveyor in that case would find the existing marker and use measuring instruments to find the point 120.25 feet south of that, and place a new marker at that location.  These markers are called monuments.Over time, development, vandalism, and acts of nature often wreak havoc on monumentation, so the land surveyor is often forced to consider other evidence such as fence locations, woodlines, monuments on neighboring property, recollections of people, and other evidence.Reference monumentation refers to actual physical points on the ground that define location of boundary lines that divide neighboring parcels as well as their respective corners. Also called survey control, they are most often 1/2 or 5/8 iron rebar rods or pipes placed at 18 minimum depth.  These rods and/or pipes usually have an affixed plastic cap over the top bearing the responsible surveyors name and license number. In addition to rods and pipes, surveyors often use 4x4 concrete posts at corners of large parcels or anywhere that would require more stability (e.g. beach sand). They place them three feet deep.  In places where there is asphalt or concrete, it is common to place nails or aluminum alloy caps to re-establish boundary corners. Marks are meant to be durable, stable, and as permanent as possible.  The aim is to provide sufficient marks so some marks will remain for future re-establishment of boundaries. The material and marking used on monuments placed to mark boundary corners are often subject to state laws.File:Yellowstone 1871b.jpg|right|thumb|250px|Haydens map of National Park, 1871. His surveys were a significant factor toward establishing the park in 1872.Cadastral land surveyors are licensed by governments. In the United States, cadastral surveys are typically conducted by the federal government, specifically through the Cadastral Surveys branch of the of Land Management (BLM), formerly the Land Office (GLO).(A History of the Rectangular Survey System by C. Albert White, 1983, Pub: Washington, D.C. : U.S. Dept. of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management : For sale by Supt. of Docs., U.S. G.P.O.,) They consult with USFS, Park Service, Corps of Engineers, BIA, Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Reclamation, etc.  In states that have been organized per the Land Survey System (PLSS), surveyors carry out BLM Cadastral Surveys in accordance with that system. A common use of a survey is to determine a legal property boundary.  The first stage in such a survey is to research relevant title records such as deeds, survey monumentation (marks on the ground), and any public or private records that provide relevant data.In order to properly establish the position for survey markers, the surveyor must then take measurements.  To do this, the surveyor usually places a station over various points on the ground and records distances taken with the EDM.The surveyor analyses the data and makes comparisons with existing records to determine evidence that can be used to establish boundary positions.  The surveyor calculates the bearing and distance of lines between the boundary corners and total station positions and uses them to set out and mark the corners in the field.  He may check measurements by measuring directly between places using a flexible tape.The art of surveyingMany properties have considerable problems with regards to improper bounding, miscalculations in past surveys, titles, easements, and wildlife crossings. Also many properties are created from multiple divisions of a larger piece over the course of years, and with every additional division the risk of miscalculation increases. The result can be abutting properties not coinciding with adjacent parcels, resulting in hiatuses (gaps) and overlaps. The art plays a role when a surveyor must solve a puzzle using pieces that do not exactly fit together. In these cases, the solution is based upon the surveyors research and interpretation, along with established procedures for resolving discrepancies. References ;Notes* Keay J (2000), The Great Arc: The Dramatic Tale of How India was Mapped and Everest was Named, Harper Collins, 182pp, ISBN 0-00-653123-7.* Pugh J C (1975), Surveying for Field Scientists, Methuen, 230pp, ISBN 0-416-07530-4* Genovese I (2005), Definitions of Surveying and Associated Terms, ACSM, 314pp, ISBN 0-9765991-0-4.(9566729801)External links*  Gomtres sans Frontires: NGO Surveyors without borders.* The National Museum of Surveying The Home of the National Museum of Surveying in Springfield, Illinois* Natural Resources Canada - Surveying Good overview of surveying with references to construction surveys, cadastral surveys, photogrammetry surveys, mining surveys, hydrographic surveys, route surveys, control surveys and topographic surveys* As-builts - Problems & Proposed Solutions &mdash; Discussion on Building Surveys within Construction industry by Stephen R. Pettee, CCM* Table of Surveying, 1728 Cyclopaedia*  Google Map with overlays for principal meridians, coordinate zones, NGS Control, USGS topographic maps and more*  Surveying & Triangulation The History Of Surveying And Survey Equipment()az:Topoqrafiyada:Landmlingde:VermessungGeodsiees:Agrimensurafa:fr:Gomtre-experthi:it:Topografianl:Landmeetkundeja:no:Landmlerpl:Miernictwopt:Topografiafi:Maanmittaussv:Lantmteriuk:azh:
61729
Akita_Prefecture
 is a prefecture of Japan located in the Region of northern Honshu, the main island of Japan.(Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). Provinces and prefectures in ; Thoku in .) The capital is the city of Akita.(Nussbaum, Akita in .) History The area of Akita has been created from the ancient provinces of Dewa and Mutsu.(Nussbaum, Provinces and prefectures in )Separated from the principal Japanese centres of commerce, politics, and population by several hundred kilometres and the u and Dewa mountain ranges to the east, Akita remained largely isolated from Japanese society until after the year 600. Akita was a region of hunter-gatherers and principally nomadic tribes.The first historical record of what is now Akita Prefecture dates to 658, when the no Hirafu conquered the native Ezo tribes at what are now the cities of Akita and Noshiro. Hirafu, then governor of Province (the northwest part of Honsh bordering the of Japan), established a fort on the River, and thus began the Japanese settlement of the region.In 733, a new military settlementlater renamed Castlewas built in modern-day Akita city at Takashimizu, and more permanent roads and structures were developed. The region was used as a base of operations for the Japanese empire as it drove the native Ezo people from northern Honsh.It shifted hands several times. During the shogunate it was appropriated to the clan, who ruled the region for 260 years, developing the agriculture and mining industries that are still predominant today. Throughout this period, it was classified as part of Province.( In 1871, during the Meiji Restoration, Dewa Province was reshaped and the old daimy domains were abolished and administratively reconstructed, resulting in the modern-day borders of Akita.The famous period waka poet, no Komachi, is said to have been born in Yuzawa City, Ogachi Town, located in the southeast of the prefecture. Geography File:Akita mt chokai.jpg|thumb|right|ChokaiLocated in the north of Honshu, Akita Prefecture faces the of Japan in the west and is bordered by four other prefectures: Aomori in the north, Iwate in the east, Miyagi in the southeast, and Yamagata in the south.Akita Prefecture is rectangular in shape, roughly 181 km from north to south and 111 km from west to east. The Mountains mark the eastern border of the prefecture, and the higher Mountains run parallel through the center of the prefecture. Like much of northern Japan, the prefecture has cold winters, particularly away from the sea.The Peninsula is a prominent feature of the coastline.CitiesThirteen cities are located in Akita Prefecture:Towns and villagesthumb|Map of Akita Prefecture.These are all of the towns and villages in each district.Mergers Economy Like much of the Region, Akitas economy remains dominated by traditional industries, such as agriculture, fishing, and forestry. This has led many young people to migrate to Tokyo and other large cities. Akita Prefecture is where declines in population are most severe in Japan; it is one of four prefectures in Japan registering declines in population since 1945. It also has the lowest number of children as a percentage of the population, at 11.2%.() As of 2010, it has a population of just over 1 million people.()CultureAkita is famous for rice farming and its sake breweries.( ) It is well-known for having the highest consumption of sake in Japan,(The Appellation System for Sake in Akita Prefecture and Development Program for Akita Shun-ginjo, Kyuichi Saito, Journal of the Brewing Society of Japan; Vol. 87, No.11, 1992) and thought to be the origin of the Akita breed of dog which carries the prefectures name. The women of the region, referred to as , have also gained widespread renown for their white skin, rounded faces and high voices, all of which are considered highly desirable. no Komachi is a famous example of an Akita bijin. Food *Kiritanpo Nabe*Gakko(Akita Prefectural Guide, AKITA Prefecture)*Rice - komachi*SakeTourismFile:Kakunodate.jpg|thumb|right|Samurai house in KakunodateNear Tazawa, there are a number of hot springs resorts (onsen). These are popular with tourists from all over Japan.  In addition, its numerous seasonal festivals (matsuri) offer a glimpse of rural or traditional Japan. Some famous examples are the Akita Kant, the Omagari Fireworks, Namahage Festival, and the Yokote Kamakura Festivals.Kakunodate is a particularly charming old town, known as the little Kyoto, full of preserved samurai houses.  The Aoyagi house is the former residence of Odano Naotake, the man who illustrated Japans first modern guide to the human anatomy.  The house is now a museum and gallery of medical illustrations and traditional crafts.Starting in 2009, Akita began experiencing a huge surge in Korean tourism after the airing of the popular drama Iris, which featured several scenes shot in Akita, most notably at Lake Tazawa and Ogas GAO Aquarium.() Media  Television *Broadcasting System (ABS)*Television (AKT)*Asahi Broadcasting (AAB)NotesReferences* Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric and Kthe Roth. (2005).  Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: University Press. 10-ISBN 0-674-01753-6; 13-ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5;  OCLC 58053128 External links * Official Akita Prefecture website * Official Akita Prefecture website * Akita Sightseeing Guide Akita()zh-min-nan:Akita-kon()dAkitaAkita(talaith)Akitaprefektuurde AkitaAkitadAkitade Akitagan:ti AkitaAkitadi Akita()Prefecturewa Akitaprefektraprefektraprefektra()Akitamn:(prefectuur)ja:(prefektur)km:Akitapt:AkitaAkita()Prefecture(prefektra)()Akitaprefektuuriprefekturng Akitath:vi:Akita(prefektura)wuu:zh-yue:zh:
62133
Pierre_Berton
:For other people with the same name, see Berton (disambiguation). portaldisp   Pierre Francis de Marigny Berton,  (July 12, 1920 &ndash; November 30, 2004) was a noted Canadian author of non-fiction, especially Canadiana and history, and was a well-known television personality and journalist.An accomplished storyteller, Berton was one of Canadas most prolific and popular authors. He wrote 50 books, including ones on culture, Canadian history, critiques of mainstream religion, anthologies, childrens books and historical works for youth. He popularized Canadian history. Biography He was born on July 12, 1920, in Yukon, where his father had moved for the 1898 Gold Rush.()  His family moved to City, Yukon in 1921, where they lived until moving to British Columbia in 1932.(   His mother, Laura Beatrice Berton (ne Thompson) was a school teacher in Toronto until she was offered a job as a teacher in City at the age of 29 in 1907. She met Frank Berton in the nearby mining town of Granville shortly after settling in Dawson and teaching kindergarten. Laura Beatrice Bertons autobiography of life in the Yukon entitled I Married the Klondike was published in her later years and gave her, what her son Pierre describes as a modicum of fame, which she thoroughly enjoyed.()Like his father, Pierre Berton worked in Klondike mining camps during his years as a history major at the of British Columbia,() where he also worked on the student paper Ubyssey.()  He spent his early newspaper career in Vancouver, where at 21 he was the youngest city editor on any Canadian daily, replacing editorial staff that had been called up during the World War.(Berton himself was conscripted into the Army under the Resources Mobilization Act in 1942 and attended basic training in British Columbia, nominally as a reinforcement soldier intended for Seaforth Highlanders of Canada.( He elected to go Active (the euphemism for volunteering for overseas service) and his aptitude was such that he was appointed Lance Corporal and attended NCO school, and became a basic training instructor in the rank of corporal.(  Due to a background in university COTC and inspired by other citizen-soldiers who had been commissioned, he sought training as an officer.(Image:Miners climb Chilkoot.jpg|thumb|300px|Miners and prospectors ascend the Chilkoot Trail during the Gold RushBerton spent the next several years attending a variety of military courses, becoming, in his words, the most highly trained officer in the military. He was warned for overseas duty many times, and was granted embarkation leave many times, each time finding his overseas draft being cancelled.( A coveted trainee slot with the Canadian Intelligence Corps saw Berton, now a Captain, trained to act as an Intelligence Officer (IO), and after a stint as an instructor at the Royal Military College in Ontario, he finally went overseas in March 1945.( In the UK, he was told that he would have to requalify as an IO because the syllabus in the UK was different from that in the intelligence school in Canada. By the time Berton had requalified, the war in Europe had ended. He volunteered for the Canadian Army Pacific Force (CAPF), granted a final embarkation leave, and found himself no closer to combat employment by the time the Japanese surrendered in September 1945.(Berton moved to Toronto in 1947. At the age of 31 he was named managing editor of Macleans.( In 1957, he became a key member of the CBCs public affairs flagship program, Close-Up, and a permanent panelist on the popular television show Page Challenge.() That same year, he also narrated the Award-nominated Film Board of Canada documentary  City of Gold, exploring life in his hometown of Dawson City during the Gold Rush.()  He then released an album in conjunction with Records, entitled The Story of the Klondike: Stampede for Gold - The Golden Trail.()Berton joined the Star as associate editor and columnist in 1958, leaving in 1962 to commence Pierre Berton Show, which ran until 1973.( It was on this show that in 1971 Berton interviewed Lee in what was to be the famous martial artists only surviving television interview.  Bertons television career included spots as host and writer on Country, The Great Debate, Theatre, The Secret of My Success and National Dream.(Berton served as the Chancellor of College and, along with numerous honorary degrees, received over 30 literary awards such as the Generals Award for Creative Non-Fiction (three times), the Leacock Medal of Humour, and the Lger Award for Lifetime Achievement in Heritage Conservation. He is a member of Walk of Fame, having been inducted in 1998. In Greatest Canadian project, he was voted #31 in the list of great Canadians.(In 2004, Berton published his 50th book, Prisoners of the North, after which he announced in an interview with News Service that he was retiring from writing. On October 17, 2004, the $12.6 million CAD Pierre Berton Resource Library, named in his honour, was opened in Ontario.()(http://www.vaughanpl.info/files/news/news013107.pdf Pierre Berton Resource Library Wins Another Prestigious Award!, Vaughan Public Libraries, 31 January 2007. Retrieved 2010-05-24.)He had lived in nearby Ontario, for about fifty years.()Berton raised eyebrows in October 2004 by discussing his forty years of recreational use of marijuana on two CBC Television programs, Play and Mercer Report. On the latter show he gave a celebrity tip on how to roll a joint.()() Death Berton died at Sunnybrook hospital in Toronto, reportedly of heart failure, at the age of 84 on November 30, 2004.(His childhood home in City, now called Berton House, is a writers retreat. Established writers apply for three-month long subsidized residencies there; while in residence, they give a public reading in both Dawson City and Whitehorse. The Berton House Retreat is sponsored by a charitable foundation set up to support it and by the Klondike Visitors Association; the administrator is Elsa Franklin. Franklin was Bertons long-time editor and agent. Pierre Berton Award Established in 1994, the Pierre Berton Award is presented annually by National History Society for distinguished achievement in presenting Canadian history in an informative and engaging manner. Berton was the first recipient and agreed to lend his name to future awards. Awards * Elizabeth II Golden Jubilee Medal 2002* Order of Canada, Companion, 1986.()* Booksellers Award, 1982.* Authors Association Literary Award for non-fiction, 1981* Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal 1977* Award, best public affairs broadcaster in radio, 1978.* Generals Awards for: The Last Spike, 1972; Klondike, 1958; The Mysterious North, 1956.* Leacock Medal for Humour, 1959.Bibliography* 1954 The golden trail: the story of the Klondike rush* 1954 The Royal Family* 1955 The Golden Trail* 1956 The Mysterious North: Encounters with the Canadian Frontier, 1947-1954* 1956 Illustrated Heritage of Canada: The Beginning Years, 1860-1870* 1957 Illustrated Heritage of Canada: The Seventies* 1958 Klondike: The Last Great Gold Rush, 1896-1899* 1959 The Klondike Fever: The Life and Death of the Last Great Gold Rush* 1959 Just add water and stir* 1960 Adventures of a columnist* 1961 Secret World of Og* 1961 The new city : a prejudiced view of Toronto* 1962 Fast, fast, fast relief* 1963 The big sell : an introduction to the black arts of door-to door salesmanship & other techniques* 1965 My War with the Twentieth Centur* 1965 The comfortable pew : a critical look at Christianity and the religious establishment in the new age* 1966 The Cool, Crazy, Committed World of the Sixties* 1968 The Smug Minority* 1970 The National Dream: The Great Railway, 1871-1881* 1971 The Last Spike: The Great Railway, 1881-1885* 1972 The Impossible Railway: The Building of the Canadian Pacific* 1973 Drifting Home* 1975 Hollywoods Canada: The Americanization of the National Image* 1977 The Dionne Years: A Thirties Melodrama* 1978 The wild frontier: more tales from the remarkable past* 1980  The Invasion of Canada: 1812-1813* 1981 Flames Across the Border: 1813-1814* 1982 Why we act like Canadians: a personal exploration of our national character* 1983 The Klondike Quest* 1984 The Promised Land: Settling the West 1896-1914* 1985 Masquerade* 1986 Vimy* 1987 Starting out: 1920-1947* 1988 The Arctic Grail: The Quest for the North West Passage and the North Pole, 1818-1909* 1990 The Great Depression: 1929-1939* 1994 The Battle of Lake Erie* 1994 Winter* 1995 My Times: Living With History, 1917-1995* 1995 Attack on Montreal* 1996 The Great Lakes* 1996 Farewell to the Twentieth Century* 1997 1967: The Last Good Year* 1999 Worth Repeating: A Literary Resurrection* 2000 Welcome To The 21st Century: More Absurdities From Our Time* 2001 Marching as to War: Canadas Turbulent Years* 2002 Niagara: A History of the Falls* 2002 My Country: The Remarkable Past* 2002 Cats I Have Known and Loved* 2003 The Joy of Writing: A Guide for Writers Disguised as a Literary Memoir* 2005 Prisoners of the North* 2005 For the Love of History: Winners of the Pierre Berton Award Bring to Life Canadas Past*History for Young Canadians**The Battles of the War of 1812***The Capture of Detroit***The Death of Isaac Brock***Revenge of the Tribes***Canada Under Siege***The Battle of Lake Erie***The Death of Tecumseh***Attack on Montreal**Exploring the Frozen North***Parry of the Arctic***Jane Franklins Obsession***Dr. Kane of the Arctic Seas***Trapped in the Arctic** Canada Moves West*** The Railway Pathfinders*** The Men in Sheepskin Coats*** A Prairie Nightmare*** Steel Across the Plains*** Steel Across the Shield**The Great Klondike Gold Rush***Bonanza Gold***The Klondike Stampede***Trails of 98, City of Gold***Before the Gold Rush***Kings of the KlondikeAll of Pierre Bertons writings, including finished books and articles as well as manuscripts, drafts, and research material are now held in the Pierre Berton fonds at the McMaster University Archives here.Footnotes External links *The Canadian Encyclopedia*CBC Archives*Berton House Writers Retreat*Pierre Berton Award*The Story of the Klondike: Stampede for Gold - The Golden Trail Album Details at FolkwaysBertonBertonBerton (crivain)BertonBertonBerton
62636
Lidice
 established1_type    Lidice () is a village in the Republic just northwest of Prague. It is built on the site of a previous village of the same name which, as part of the Nazi-created of Bohemia and Moravia, was, on orders directly from Himmler, completely destroyed by German forces in reprisal for the assassination of Heydrich in the late spring of 1942. On June 10, 1942, all 192 men over 16 years of age from the village were murdered on the spot by the Germans in a much publicised atrocity. The rest of the population were sent to concentration camps where many women and nearly all the children were killed.(p. 86 & 91 (footnote 74)of Bernhard Kolb, die Juden in Nuernberg, bearbeitet von Gerhard Jochem, www.rijo-research.de, index Nurnberg (in German, English translation forthcoming))HistoryThe village is first mentioned in writing in 1318. After the industrialization of the area, many of its people worked in mines and factories in the neighboring cities of Kladno and Slan.Heydrichs assassinationIn 1942, Heydrich was the deputy Reichsprotektor of the Nazi German of Bohemia and Moravia. This area of the former Czechoslovakia had been occupied by Germany since 1939.On the morning of May 27, 1942, Heydrich was being driven from his country villa at Beany to his office at Castle. When he reached the Holeovice area of Prague, his car was attacked by the Czech and Slovak soldiers (on behalf of the Czechoslovak government-in-exile), Gabk and Kubi. These men, who had been part of a team trained in Great Britain, had parachuted into Bohemia in December 1941 as part of Anthropoid. After Gabks gun failed, Kubi threw a bomb at Heydrichs car. Both men managed to escape the scene of the assassination. On June 4, Heydrich died in Bulovka hospital in Prague from septicaemia caused by pieces of upholstery entering his body when the bomb exploded.() Hitler suggested Daluege, Heydrichs successor, to `wade through blood` to find Heydrichs killers. The Germans began a sweeping and bloody retaliation campaign targeting the entire Czech population.The mourning speeches at Heydrichs funeral in Berlin were not yet over, when on June 9 the decision was made to make up for his death. Hermann Frank, Secretary of State for the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, reported from Berlin that the Fhrer had commanded the following concerning any village found to have harboured Heydrichs killers:#Execute all adult men#Transport all women to a concentration camp#Gather the children suitable for Germanization, then place them in SS families in the Reich and bring the rest of the children up in other ways#Burn down the village and level it entirely350px|left|thumb|Men massacred at Horks farm in LidiceMassacreBhme, SS Commander of the C division of the Einsatzgruppe, acted on the commands immediately. Members of the German Army field police and SD (Sicherheitsdienst) surrounded the village of Lidice, blocking all avenues of escape. The Nazi regime chose this village because of its residents known hostility to the occupation, and because Lidice was suspected of harboring local resistance partisans.All men of the village were rounded up and taken to the farmstead of the Hork family on the edge of the village. Mattresses were taken from neighbouring houses where they were stood up against the wall of the Horks barn. Shooting of the men commenced at about 7 a.m. At first the men were shot in groups of five, but Bhme thought the executions were proceeding too slowly and ordered that ten men be shot at a time. The dead were left lying where they fell. This continued until the afternoon hours when there were 173 dead. The next day, seven women, along with nineteen men who had been working in a mine, were sent to Prague, where they were also shot.  All the women and children of the village were taken first to Lidice village school. They were then taken to the nearby town of Kladno where they were detained in the grammar school for three days. The children were separated from their mothers. Four women were pregnant and were sent to the same hospital where Heydrich died. They were given abortions and then sent to different concentration camps. One hundred and eighty-four women of Lidice were loaded on trucks on June 12, 1942, driven to Kladno railway station and forced into a special passenger train guarded by a large escort. In the morning of June 14, 1942 the train halted on a railway siding at the camp at Ravensbrck. On their arrival the Lidice women were first isolated in a special block. The women were forced to work in leather processing, road building, textile and ammunition factories. Lack of hygiene, epidemics and contagious diseases spread and took most of the women. Some went mad and others were murdered.Eighty-eight Lidice children were transported to the area of the former textile factory in Gneisenau Street in d. Their arrival was announced by a telegram from Horst Bhmes Prague office which ended with: the children are only bringing what they wear. No special care is desirable. The care was minimal. They suffered from a lack of hygiene and from illnesses. By order of the camp management, no medical care was given to the children. Shortly after their arrival in d, officials from the Central Race and Settlement branch chose seven children at random for Germanisation.(Lynn H. Nicholas, Cruel World: The Children of Europe in the Nazi Web p 254 ISBN 0-679-77663-X)The furor over Lidice caused some hesitation over the fate of the remaining children,( but in late June Eichmann ordered the massacre of the remainder of the children. On July 2, 1942 all of the remaining 81 Lidice children were handed over to the d Gestapo office, who in turn had them transported to the extermination camp at Chemno 70 kilometres away, where they were gassed to death in Magirus vans. It is almost certain they were killed on the day of their arrival. Out of the 105 Lidice children, 82 died in Chemno, six died in the German Lebensborn orphanages and 17 returned home.  350px|left|thumb|Destruction of LidiceThe village of Lidice was set on fire and the remains of the buildings were bulldozed, every last remaining piece of evidence being destroyed. Even those buried in the town cemetery were not spared. Their remains were dug up and destroyed. A film was made of the entire process by Treml.  A collaborator with German intelligence, Treml had run a Zeiss-Ikon shop in Palace in Prague. After the German occupation he became a filming adviser for the National Socialist German Workers Party.Altogether, about 340 people from Lidice died because of the German reprisal (192 men, 60 women and 88 children).A small Czech village called Leky was also destroyed two weeks after Lidice. Here both men and women were shot, and children were sent to concentration camps or Aryanised.The death toll resulting from the effort to avenge the death of Heydrich is estimated at 1,300. This count includes relatives of the partisans, their supporters, Czech elites suspected of disloyalty and random victims like those from Lidice.thumb|200px|British poster commemorating LidiceNazi propaganda had openly, and proudly, announced the events in Lidice, unlike other massacres in occupied Europe which were kept secret. The information was instantly picked up by Allied media.CommemorationsIn September 1942, coal miners in Stoke-on-Trent in Great Britain founded the organisation Lidice Shall Live to raise funds for the rebuilding of the village after the war.(Nuremberg Trial Proceedings Vol. 8. February 22, 1946)Soon after the razing of the village, several towns in various countries were named after it (such as Jernimo-Ldice in City, Barrio Ldice and its hospital in Venezuela, de Capira in Panama, and towns in Brazil), so that the name would live on in spite of Hitlers intentions. A neighborhood in Hill, Illinois, was renamed from Stern Park to Lidice. A square in the English city of Coventry, itself devastated during World War II, is named after Lidice. An alley in a very crowded area of downtown Chile is named after the town of Lidice too, and one of the buildings there has a small plaque that explains its tragic story. A street in Sofia is named to commemorate the massacre.  In the wake of the massacre, Jennings directed a movie about Lidice, Silent Village (1943), using amateur actors from a Welsh mining village, Cwmgiedd. An American film was made in 1943 called Madman, however it contained a number of inaccuracies in the story.  A more accurate British film, Daybreak, starring Bottoms as Kubi and Anthony Andrews as Gabk, was released in 1975.American poet St. Vincent Millay wrote a book-length verse play on the massacre, Murder of Lidice, which was printed in its entirety in the Oct. 19, 1942, edition of Life magazine and published as a book that same year by Harper.(Millay, Edna St. Vincent. The Murder of Lidice. New York: Harper: 1942.)Czech composer Martin composed his Memorial to Lidice (an 8-minute orchestral work) in 1943 as a response to the massacre. The piece quotes from the Czech St Wenceslas Chorale, as well as, in the climax of the piece, the opening notes (dot-dot-dot-dash  V in Morse code) of 5th Symphony.(Mihule J. Liner note to Supraphon CD 11 1931-2 001, which includes the work played by the Czech Philharmonic Orchestra conducted by Anerl.)Lidice since 1945Women from Lidice who survived imprisonment at Ravensbrck returned after the Second World War. They were rehoused in a new village of Lidice that was built overlooking the original site. The first part of the new village was completed in 1949.Two men from Lidice were in the United Kingdom serving in the Air Force at the time of the massacre. After 1945 Officer Josef Hork and Lieutenant Stbrn returned to Czechoslovakia to serve in the Czechoslovak Air Force. However, after the coup dtat of 1948 the new Communist government would not allow them to apply to be housed in the new Lidice because they had served in the forces of one of the western powers. Hork and his family returned to Britain and the RAF and was killed in a flying accident in December 1948.(David Vaughan. Josef Horak, a twentieth century Czech hero. esk Rozhlas. July 24, 2002.)A sculpture from the 1990s by academic sculptor Uchytilov stands today overlooking the site of the old village of Lidice. Entitled The Memorial to the Children Victims of the War it comprises 82 bronze statues of children (42 girls and 40 boys) aged 1 to 16 to honour the children who were murdered at Chemno in the summer of 1942. A cross with a crown of thorns marks the mass grave of the Lidice men. Overlooking the site is a memorial area flanked by a museum and a small exhibition hall.(http://www.lidice-memorial.cz/to2000_en.aspx Lidice Memorial: History) The memorial area is linked to the new village by an avenue of linden trees. In 1955 a Rosarium of 29,000 rose bushes was created beside the avenue of lindens overlooking the site of the old village. In the 1990s the Rosarium was neglected, but after 2001 a new Rosarium with 21,000 bushes was designed and created.(The History of Lidice Memorial Before Year 2000. Lidice Memorial.)Situated 500 metres from the museum, in the new village, is an art gallery which displays permanent and temporary exhibitions. The annual childrens art competition attracts entries worldwide.Sister cities*  Khojali (2010)(A street in Lidice, Czechia to be named after Khojaly. APA. February 9, 2010.)(   .  )See also* punishment* Kutschera* of massacres* Reprisal* Sir Barnett Stross* Kenton* massacre* war crimes* Oradour-sur-Glane* PostoloprtyReferencesBooks* Joan M. Wolf: Named Eva. 2007. ISBN 0618535799* Eduard Stehlk: Lidice, The Story of a Czech Village. 2004. ISBN 8086758141* Zena Irma Trinka: A little village called Lidice: Story of the return of the women and children of Lidice. International Book Publishers, Western Office, North Dakota, 1947.* Maureen Myant: The Search. Alma Books, 2010. ISBN 9781846881039External links*  - A fictionalized account of the death of Reinhard Heydrich and the reprisal against Licide.*  - The true story of the massacre of a small Czech village by the Nazis is retold as if it happened in Wales.* Alan Heath : Fate of the children of Lidice*     Lidice Memorial*  Official Website of Municipality*  Recent (since 1990s) search for missing children*  Photo series about destruction of Lidice by Reichsarbeitsdienst*  http://www.filmlidice.cz Lidice film Official website, directed by Nikolaev  The first ever Czech-made feature film about the destruction of Lidice (to be released in spring 2011).ar:bs:Lidicebg:cs:Lidiceda:Lidicede:Lidicees:Ldiceeo:Lidicefr:Lidicehr:Lidiceit:Lidicehe:lt:Lidichu:Lidicenl:Lidiceja:no:Lidicepl:Lidicept:Ldicero:Lidiceru:sk:Lidicesl:Lidicefi:Lidicesv:Lidicezh:
63503
Duluth,_Minnesota
footnotes                Duluth ( in English) is a port city in the state of Minnesota and is the seat of Saint Louis County. The fourth largest city in Minnesota, Duluth had a total population of 86,265 in the 2010 census.() Duluth is also the second largest city that is located on Lake Superior after Bay, Ontario, and has the largest metropolitan area on Lake Superior.  The Duluth MSA had a population of 279,771 in 2010. Situated at the westernmost point of the Great Lakes on the north shore of Superior, Duluth is deep-water accessible to the Atlantic Ocean  away via the Lakes and Canal/York State Barge Canal or Lawrence Seaway passages.Duluth forms a area with Wisconsin called the Ports.  These two cities share the DuluthSuperior harbor and together are the Great Lakes largest port transporting coal, ore (taconite),  and grain. As a tourist destination for the Midwest, Duluth features Americas only all-freshwater aquarium, the Lakes Aquarium; the Lift Bridge, which spans the Duluth Ship Canal into the Duluth Harbor; and Point (known as Park Point locally), one of the worlds longest freshwater sand spits, spanning ().  The city is also the starting point for vehicle trips along Minnesotas famous North Shore.()The city is named for Daniel Greysolon, Le Sieur du Luth, the first known European explorer of the area.HistoryPre-foundingthumb|right|Minnesota Point from the hill above Duluth in 1875Native American tribes had occupied the Duluth area for thousands of years. The original inhabitants are believed to have been members of Paleo-Indian cultures, followed by the Old Copper people, who hunted with spear points and knives and fished with metal hooks. Around two thousand years ago, the Woodlands people, known for their burial mounds and pottery, occupied the area. They also cultivated rice, a crop that continues to be harvested and sold today by Ojibwa tribes in the region. The Sioux inhabited the region until the middle of the 17th century. In about 1630, an Indian village known as Wi-ah-quah-ke-che-qume-eng was at present day Fond du Lac.(Van Brunt, Walter. Duluth and St. Louis County Minnesota: Their Story and People.  Chicago; The American Historical Society 1921) The Ojibwa drove the Sioux out soon after 1654, when the Chippewa were forced from eastern seaboard areas by the Iroquois. (Christianson, Theodore.  Minnesota:  the land of sky-tinted waters.  Chicago:  the American Historical Society, 1935.)Duluths name in Ojibwe is Onigamiinsing(at the little portage) because of the small and easy portage across Point between Lake Superior and western Saint Louis Bay forming Duluths harbor. According to Ojibwa history, Spirit Island, located near the Spirit Valley neighborhood, was the Sixth Stopping Place where the northern and southern branches of the Ojibwa Nation came together and then proceeded to their Seventh Stopping Place near the present city of Pointe, Wisconsin.In 1659, Radisson and des Groseilliers went searching for furs in the Lake Superior region and visited the area that became todays Duluth. Daniel Greysolon, Sieur du Lhut, the citys namesake, arrived in 1679 to settle rivalries between two Indian nations, the Dakota and the Ojibwa, and to advance trading missions in the area. His work accomplished both objectives, with the Ojibwa becoming middlemen between the French and the Dakota. As a result, the area prospered, and as early as 1692 the Bay Company set up a small post at Fond du Lac.thumb|right|Ruins of old Fond du Lac trading post, as they appeared in 1907It was not until 1792 that the next trading post, on the Wisconsin side of the Louis River, was opened by Jean Baptiste Cadotte of the West Company. A fire destroyed the post in 1800, but a German migr, Jacob Astor, constructed a post on the rivers Minnesota side. The store initially floundered as a result of the Indians insistence in trading with established English and French partners. However, Astor managed to convince the States Congress to ban foreigners from trading in American territory. His Fur Company was reformed in 1816-17. Hard times hit the post once again by 1839, because fashion-conscious Europeans were choosing silk hats over those made from beaver pelts.Two Treaties of Fond du Lac were signed in the present neighborhood of Fond du Lac in 1826 and 1847. As part of the Treaty of Washington (1854) with the Superior Band of Chippewa, the du Lac Indian Reservation was established upstream from Duluth near Minnesota.  The Ojibwa population was relocated there.Permanent settlementthumb|Chester TerraceInterest in the area was piqued in the 1850s as rumors of mining began to circulate. A government land survey in 1852, followed by a treaty with local tribes in 1854, secured wilderness for gold-seeking explorers, sparked a land rush, and led to the development of ore mining in the area.Around the same time, newly-constructed channels and locks in the East permitted large ships to access the area. A road connecting Duluth to the Twin Cities was also constructed. Eleven small towns on both sides of the Louis River were formed, establishing Duluths roots as a city.By 1857, copper resources became scarce and the areas economic focus shifted to timber harvesting. A nationwide financial crisis caused nearly three-quarters of the citys early pioneers to leave.In the late 1860s, financier Cooke (after whom the Cooke State Park is named) convinced the Superior and Mississippi Railroad to create an extension from St. Paul to Duluth. The railroad opened areas due north and west of Lake Superior to ore mining. Duluths population on New Years Day in 1869 consisted of fourteen families; by the of July, 3,500 people were present to celebrate.Twentieth centuryImage:Ships-Superior-Duluth-20060928.jpg|thumb|left|The J.B. Ford storing and the J.A.W. Iglehart offloading cement.Image:DuluthMN July2004.jpg|thumb|left|A view of Duluth and the surrounding area from the Tower.By the end of the nineteenth century, Duluth was a thriving city. Duluth was home to more millionaires per capita than any other city in the world and had become a favorite summer playground for the rich and the famous. Magnificent manor homes and Victorian mansions welcomed family and friends to lavish social events. At the turn of the century, the citys port passed New York City and Chicago in gross tonnage handled, elevating it to the leading port in the United States. Ten newspapers, six banks and an eleven-story skyscraper, the Torrey Building were also present.In 1907, Steel announced that a $5 million plant would be constructed in the area. Although steel production didnt begin until 1915, predictions held that Duluths population would rise to 200,000300,000. With the Works steel plant came Morgan Park, a once-independent company town that now stands as a city neighborhood. The Calk Horseshoe Company was founded in 1908 and later became a major manufacturer and exporter of wrenches and automotive tools.  Duluths huge wholesale Marshall Wells Hardware Company expanded in 1901 by opening branches in Portland, Oregon, and Winnepeg, Ontario; the company catalog totaled 2,390 pages by 1913. The Duluth Showcase Company, which later became the Duluth Refrigerator Company and then the Coolerator Company, was established in 1908.  The Universal Atlas Cement Company, which made cement from slag that was a by-product of the steel plant, began operations in 1917.The city experienced a large immigrant influx during the early twentieth century and became home to one of the largest Finnish communities in the world outside of Finland.  For decades, a Finnish-language daily newspaper, taking the namesake of the old Grand Duchy of Finlands pro-independence leftist paper, Pivlehti, was published in the city. The Finnish IWW (Industrial Workers of the World) community published a widely read labor newspaper Industrialisti. From 1907 to 1941, the Finnish Socialist Federation and then the IWW operated Peoples College, an educational institution that taught classes from a working class, socialist perspective. Duluth was also settled by immigrants from Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Germany, Austria, Ireland, England, Italy, Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, Croatia, Serbia, Ukraine, Romania, and Russia.  Today, people of Scandinavian descent constitute a strong ethnic plurality of the population, accounting for about one-third of Duluths residents.In September 1918, a group calling itself the Knights of Liberty dragged Finnish immigrant Ollie Kinkkonen from his boarding house, tarred and feathered him, and lynched him. Kinkkonen did not want to fight in World War I and planned to return to Finland. His body was found two weeks later hanging in a tree in Duluths Lester Park.Another lynching in Duluth occurred on June 15, 1920 when three innocent black male circus workers were attacked by a mob and hanged after the alleged rape of a teenage girl. The lynchings took place on First Street and Second Avenue East, where today three -tall bronze statues of the men who were killed have been erected as a memorial.In 1918, the Cloquet Fire (named for the nearby town of Cloquet) burned across Carlton and southern Saint Louis Counties destroying dozens of communities in the Duluth area.  The fire was the worst natural disaster in Minnesota history in terms of the number of lives lost in a single day. Many people perished on the rural roads surrounding the Duluth area, and historical accounts tell of victims dying while trying to outrun the fire. The National Guard unit based in Duluth was mobilized in a heroic effort to battle the fire and assist victims, but the troops were overwhelmed by the enormity of the fire. In the aftermath of the fire, tens of thousands of people were injured or homeless; many of the refugees fled into the city for aid and shelter.For the first half of the 20th century, the city was an industrial port boom town with multiple grain elevators, a cement plant, a nail mill, wire mills, and the Works plant. In 1916, during World War I, a shipyard was constructed on the Saint Louis River.  A new neighborhood, today known as Riverside, was formed around the operation. Similar industrial expansions took place during the Second World War, using Duluths large harbor and the areas vast resources for the war effort.  Tankers and chasers (usually called sub-chasers) were built at the Riverside shipyard. The population of Duluth proper continued to grow after the war, peaking at 107,884 in 1960.Economic decline began in the 1950s, when high grade iron ore gave out on the Range north of Duluth: ore shipments from the Duluth harbor were the most important element of the citys economy.  Low grade ore (taconite) shipments, boosted by new taconite pellet technology, continued, but ore shipments were lower.  By the late 1970s, foreign competition began to have a detrimental impact on the American steel industry. This eventually led to the closure of the Steel Works plant in 1981, causing a significant blow to the citys economy.  The steel plants closing forced the closing of the cement company, which depended on the steel plant for raw materials (slag). Duluth is often cited as where the Belt began. Other industrial activity followed suit with more closures, including shipbuilding, machinery and the Duluth Air Force base. By the end of the decade, unemployment rates surged to 15 percent. The economic downturn was particularly hard on Duluths west side, where the Eastern and Southern European immigrant workers had traditionally lived for decades.With the decline of the citys industrial core, the local economic focus shifted to tourism. The downtown area was renovated with new red brick streets, skywalks, and new retail shops. Old warehouses along the waterfront were converted into cafs, shops, restaurants, and hotels.  These changes fashioned the new Canal Park as a trendy tourism-oriented district. The citys population, which had been experiencing a steady decline since 1960, has now stabilized at around 85,000.At the beginning of the 21st century, Duluth has become a regional epicenter for banking, retail shopping, and medical care for northern Minnesota, northern Wisconsin, and northwestern Michigan. It is estimated that more than 8,000 jobs in Duluth are directly related to Duluths two hospitals. Arts and entertainment offerings as well as year-round recreation and the natural environment have contributed to expansion of the tourist industry in Duluth. Some 3.5 million visitors each year contribute more than $400 million to the local economy.The Untold Delights of DuluthEarly doubts about the potential of the Duluth area were voiced in the speech The Untold Delights of Duluth, made by former U.S. Representative Proctor Knott of Kentucky on January 27, 1871 in the U.S. House of Representatives. The speech against the St. Croix and Superior Land Grant lampooned Western boosterism, portraying Duluth as an Eden in fantastically florid terms.()  The speech has been reprinted in collections of folklore and humorous speeches and is regarded as something of a classic. The nearby city of Proctor, Minnesota, is named for Congressman Knott.Duluths unofficial sister city, Georgia, was named by Evan P. Howell in humorous reference to Representative Knotts speech. Originally called Howells Crossroads in honor of his grandfather, Evan Howell, the town had just finished getting a railroad to the town in 1871 and the Delights of Duluth speech was still popular.Proctor Knott is sometimes credited with characterizing Duluth as the zenith city of the unsalted seas, but the honor for that coinage belongs to journalist Thomas Preston Foster, speaking at a Fourth of July picnic in 1868.(ISBN 1-889924-03-2, p. 65.)GeographyImage:Duluth-Minnesota-Superior.jpg|thumb|left|Point or Park PointAccording to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of . It is Minnesotas second largest city in terms of land area, surpassed only by Hibbing. Of its ,  or 77.89% is land and  or 22.11% is water. Duluths canal connects Superior to the DuluthSuperior harbor and the Louis River. The Aerial Lift Bridge, on which vehicles cross the canal, connects Canal Park with Point (Park Point).lake street 2006.JPG|thumb|Steep First Avenue East viewed from the Lakewalk in Canal ParkDuluths topography is dominated by a steep hillside that climbs from Lake Superior to high inland elevations. Duluth has been called the San Francisco of the Mid-West. The expression alludes to San Franciscos similar water-to-hilltop topography. This similarity was most evident before World War II, when Duluth had a network of street cars and an Incline Railroad that, like San Franciscos cable cars, climbed a steep hill (at Seventh Avenue West). The change in elevation is illustrated by Duluths two airports. The Sky Harbor airports station, situated on Park Point, has an elevation of 607 feet (185 m),() whereas the elevation of Duluth International Airport atop the hill is 1,427 feet (435 m)--820 feet higher.(As the city has grown, the population has tended to hug the Lake Superior shoreline, hence Duluth is primarily a southwestnortheast city. A considerable amount of development on the hills upslope gives Duluth a reputation for steep streets. Some neighborhoods, such as Piedmont Heights and Bayview Heights, are atop the hill, at times giving scenic views of the city. The Goat Hill neighborhood overlooking the can of worms freeway interchange above 22nd Avenue West is an example of this.  Another is Skyline Parkway, a scenic road that extends from Becks Road above the  New Duluth neighborhood near the western end of the city to the Lester Park neighborhood on the east side. Skyline Parkway crosses nearly the entire length of Duluth and affords breathtaking views of the famous Aerial Lift Bridge, Canal Park, and the many industries that inhabit the largest inland port. Most important, the tip of Lake Superior can be seen continuously from high on the brow of the hill. Perhaps the most rapidly developing part of the city is Miller Hill Mall and the adjacent big-box retailer shopping strip over the hillthe Miller Trunk Highway corridor.  The 20092010 road reconstruction project in Duluths Miller Hill area improved transit movement through the U.S. Highway 53 corridor from Trinity Road to Maple Grove Road.  The highway project reconstructed connector roads, intersections, and adjacent roadways.  Construction of a new international airport terminal is also underway as part of the governments Stimulus Reconstruction Program.Climatethumb|left|Shoreline in AprilDuluth has a humid climate, with long, snowy, very cold winters and cool summers. The nickname The Air-Conditioned City is given to Duluth because of the summertime cooling effect of Lake Superior. Severe thunderstorms do occasionally cross over the city during the summer. Winter temperatures often remain below  for periods of weeks. A normal winter brings consistent snow cover from November to April. Winter storms that pass south or east of Duluth can often set up easterly or northeasterly flow. Upslope lake-effect snow events can bring a foot (30 cm) or more of snow to the city while areas  inland receive considerably less.thumb|Lakewalk carriage ride in MaySummers are cool and comfortable with daytime temperatures averaging in the 70s F (21-26 C), compared to temperatures often over  inland. Temperatures may occasionally remain below  during evenings as late in the year as June along the Lake Superior shore, even when the inland temperature is in the 70s F (21-26 C). The phrase cooler by the lake can be heard often in weather forecasts during the summer, especially on days when an easterly wind is expected. Because the huge lake absorbs summer heat, then gradually releases it when temperatures drop below freezing, seasons are substantially delayed: November is often much warmer than March, when the lake has lost much of its heat. Great local variations are also common because of the rapid change in elevation between hilltop and shoreside. Often this variation manifests itself as snow at the Miller Hill Mall while rain falls in Canal Park.  The warmer shoreline temperatures also have permitted ginkgo trees, admired for their golden autumn leaves, to thrive beside the lake, even though Duluth is well north of the normal temperature range of ginkgos.  The lake steams in the winter when moist, lake-warmed air at the surface rises and cools, losing some of its moisture carrying capacity.dateAugust 2010Demographicsthumb|left|Herb Bergson, former Mayor of Duluth, walking to an anti-poverty rally in November 2005Duluths population has stabilized: 85,493 in 1990, 86,918 in 2000, 86,265 in 2010.    As of the census of 2000, there were 35,500 households and 19,918 families in the city.( The population density was .  There were 36,994 housing units at an average density of .  The racial makeup of the city was 92.7% White, 1.6% Black or African American, 2.4% Native American, 1.1% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 0.3% from other races, and 1.8% from two or more races.  1.1% of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race.() The populations ancestry was 23.6% German, 16.8% Norwegian, 15.3% Swedish, 10.6% Irish, 7.1% Polish, 7.0% English, 5.1% Italian, 3.2% Scottish or Scotch-Irish, 1.5% Danish, and 0.4% Welsh according to the 2000 Census.()  Thus, slightly more than one-third of Duluths residents were of Scandinavian (Norwegian, Swedish, or Danish) ancestry.Among Duluths households, 26.6% had children under 18, 41.4% were married couples living together, 11.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 43.9% were non-families. 34.5% of all households were one-person households, and 13.3% had someone 65 or older living alone. The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 2.90.In the city the age distribution of the population shows 21.3% under the age of 18, 16.2% from 18 to 24, 26.1% from 25 to 44, 21.3% from 45 to 64, and 15.1% 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females there were 93.4 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over there were 89.7 males.Duluths median household income was $33,766; median family income was $46,394. Males had a median income of $35,182, females $24,965. The capita income was $18,969. About 8.6% of families and 15.5% of all residents were below the line, including 15.4% of those under 18 and 9.5% of those 65 or over.()GovernmentLouis County CourthouseThe present mayor of Duluth is Ness.Duluth is located in 8th congressional district, represented by Republican Cravaack.As of 2009, the city has a major budget deficit.  The deficit has affected city services such as street maintenance, water service, and gas and sanitary sewer maintenance, and it has forced the reduction or elimination of many city-managed social programs. All of these compounded problems have resulted in city staff reductions. The sanitary sewer overflow problems have forced some residents to disconnect their home drainage systems from the sanitary sewer system at significant cost to the homeowner and have been a source of contention.In 2004, Duluth was center to a separation-of-church-and-state legal battle between the city council, local residents, and the Civil Liberties Union. The debate and eventual lawsuit revolved around a marble fixture on the lawn of City Hall.  The fixture was inscribed with the Commandments.  The city eventually agreed to remove the fixture.  It it now resides on private property near the Comfort Suites Hotel on Canal Park Drive.Central High School-20070815.jpg|thumb|Historic Central High SchoolThe city was featured in the New York Times article The Next Retirement Time Bomb() because Duluth conducted a financial study of the health care benefits promised to retired city employees. The study concluded that future health care obligations would bankrupt Duluths government. The article treats Duluth as representative of many local governments that have not kept tabs on future health care obligations promised to city retirees. The Duluth News Tribune portrayed prior mayor Fedo in an unflattering light with regard to responsibility in this. For decades local officials, including former mayor Doty, have acquired shared responsibility.  The reason, according to the paper, is that unions are powerful in the area and winning their favor is a major factor in being elected.During the 2000 presidential election, Green Party candidate Nader received over 7.0% of votes from Duluth residents, one of the highest Green Party percentages in the country for a city with a population of at least 85,000.Economythumb|The Str. American Victory (then, the Middletown) on Lake SuperiorDuluth is the regional hub not only of its own immediate area but also of a larger area encompassing northeastern Minnesota, northwestern Wisconsin, and the western Peninsula of Michigan. It is a major transportation center for the transshipment of coal, taconite, agricultural products, steel, limestone, and cement. In recent years it has seen strong growth in the transshipment of wind turbine components coming and going from manufacturers in both Europe and North Dakota and of oversized industrial machinery manufactured all around the world and destined for the tar sands oil extraction projects in northern Alberta.Duluth is also a center for aquatic biology and aquatic science. The city is home to the EPAs Mid-Continent Ecology Division Laboratory and the University of Minnesota-Duluth. These institutions have spawned many economically and scientifically important businesses that support Duluths economy. A short list of these businesses include ERA laboratories, LimnoLogic,() the Corporation, Environmental Consulting and Testing, and Ecolab.The city is a popular center for tourism. Duluth is a convenient base for trips to the scenic North Shore via Highway 61 and to fishing and wilderness destinations in Minnesotas far north, including the National Forest and the Waters Canoe Area. Tourists also may drive on the Shore Scenic Drive to Falls State Park, Baptism Falls (Minnesotas largest waterfall), the vertical cliff of Head, Royale National Park (reached via ferry), Portage National Monument in Grand Portage, and High Falls of the Pigeon River (on the Canadian border). Bay, Ontario, can be reached by following the highway into Canada along Lake Superior.Duluth is now working with Superior, Wisconsin, to bring Fiber internet to the Ports.(Google Fiber for the Twin Ports. Googletwinports.com.)(Miguel Heft, Hoping to Attract Google? Go Jump in the Lake. New York Times, March 21, 2010.)TransportationJohn Blatnik Bridge looking towards Superior, Wisconsin.The Duluth area marks the northern endpoint of Interstate Highway 35, which stretches south to Texas.  U.S. Highways that serve the area are U.S. Highway 53, which stretches from Crosse, Wisconsin, to Falls, Minnesota, and U.S. Highway 2, which stretches from Washington, to St.Ignace, in the Peninsula of Michigan. The southwestern part of the city has Thompson Hill, where travelers entering Duluth on I-35 can see most of Duluth, including the Lift Bridge and the waterfront. There are two freeway connections from Duluth to Superior. U.S. Highway 2 provides a connection into Superior via the I. Bong Memorial Bridge; and 535 is concurrent with U.S. 53 over the John Blatnik Bridge.John Blatnik Bridge looking across the harbor towards Duluth at night.Many state highways serve the area. Highway 23 runs diagonally across Minnesota, indirectly connecting Duluth to Falls, South Dakota. Highway 33 provides a western bypass of Duluth connecting Interstate 35, which comes up from the Twin Cities, to U.S. 53, which leads to Iron Range cities and International Falls. Highway 61 provides access to Bay, Ontario, via the North Shore of Lake Superior. Highway 194 provides a route into the city of Duluth known as Central Entrance and Mesaba Avenue.  Highway 13 reaches along Lake Superiors South Shore. Highway 35 runs along Wisconsins western border for  to its southern terminus at the Wisconsin  Illinois border (three miles north of East Dubuque).Highway 61 and parts of Highways 2 and 53 are segments of the Superior Circle Tour route that follows Superior through Minnesota, Ontario, Michigan, and Wisconsin.International Airport serves the city and surrounding region with daily flights to Minneapolis, Detroit, and Chicago, and weekly flights to Orlando and Las Vegas. Nearby municipal airports are Duluth Sky Harbor on Minnesota Point and the Richard I. Bong Memorial Airport in Superior. Both the Bong Airport and Bong Bridge are named for famed World War II pilot and highest-scoring American World War II air ace Major Richard Ira Dick Bong, a native of nearby Wisconsin.Located at the western end of the Lawrence Seaway, the Duluth-Superior seaport is the largest and farthest-inland freshwater seaport in North America. By far the largest and busiest on the Lakes, the port handles an average of 46 million short tons of cargo and over 1,100 visits each year from domestic and international vessels.  With  of waterfront, it is one of the leading bulk cargo ports in North America and ranks among the top 20 ports in the United States.()  Duluth is a major shipping port for taconite pellets, made from concentrated low-grade iron ore and destined for midwestern and eastern steel mills. The former Missabe and Iron Range Railway, now part of the National Railway, operates taconite-hauling trains in the area.  Duluth is also served by the Railway, the Pacific Railway, and the Pacific Railroad.The local bus system is run by the Transit Authority, which serves Duluth and Superior. The DTA runs a system of buses manufactured by Gillig, including new hybrids.Duluth is also served by Lines and Lines with daily service to the Twin Cities. UtilitiesDuluth gets electric power from Duluth-based Minnesota Power, a subsidiary of ALLETE Corporation. Minnesota Power produces energy at generation facilities located throughout northern Minnesota and a generation plant in North Dakota. The latter supplies electricity into the MP system by the Butte HVDC line, which ends near the town.Minnesota Power primarily uses western coal to generate electricity, but also has a number of small hydroelectric facilities, the largest of which is the Thomson Dam southwest of Duluth on the St. Louis River.In December of 2006, Minnesota Power began purchasing all the energy generated from the new 50-MW Oliver Wind I Energy Center built by NextEra Resources near Center, N.D. In 2007, Minnesota Power entered into a second 25-year wind power purchase agreement with NextEra. A 48-MW facility was built adjacent to the initial Oliver County wind farm, and the new generators began commercial operation in November of 2007. Construction began in 2010 on the 76-MW Bison Wind I Energy Center near New Salem, N.D. Bison I represents the first wave of Minnesota Power-constructed wind farms that will be built in south central North Dakota and linked to Minnesota. by way of a 465-mile direct current (DC) transmission line. ALLETE finalized an agreement Jan. 1, 2010 to purchase a 250-kilovolt DC line between Center, N.D. and Hermantown, Minn. (near ALLETE headquarters in Duluth) and phase out a long-term contract to buy coal-generated electricity now transmitted over the line.Duluth has recently become, because of the wind energy demand, a port for wind energy parts shipments from overseas and the hub for shipments out to various wind energy sites in the midwest.MediaLocal newspapers include the BusinessNorth monthly, the News Tribune, the Budgeteer News, the free newspapers Transistor, The Zenith, and The Reader Weekly.Locally based nationally distributed magazines include Life, Lake Superior Magazine, and Moon Magazine.Locally based websites include PerfectDuluthDay.com and TwinPortsNightLife.com.EducationFile:2009-0617-UMD-Weber.jpg|thumb|right|The Weber Music Hall on the campus of the University of Minnesota Duluth was designed by noted architect Pelli.Local Colleges and universities include the of Minnesota Duluth (UMD), College of St. Scholastica, Superior College, and Business University. The UMD campus includes a school. The of Wisconsin - Superior and Indianhead Technical College are in nearby Wisconsin.Most public schools are administered by Public Schools.  The schools have open enrollment. ISD 709 (Independent School District number 709) is now undertaking a reconstruction of all area schools under a program called the Red Plan.  The Red Plans goals are the reconstruction of some older schools to meet new educational guidelines, and the construction of four new school buildings.  The new schools will result in the redistricting of many students. As of 2009, the Red Plan was and is being contested in court by some citizens because of the cost of implementing the plan and because of the choice of construction management contractor.Several independent and public charter schools also serve Duluth students.  The largest is Marshall School, a private college preparatory school founded in 1972 and covering grades 4-12.  Duluth has four Catholic schools with coverage up to grades 6 or 8, two Protestant schools, one Montessori school, and six other charter and private schools.Artsthumb|left|Duluths Graffiti GraveyardLocal attractions include a variety in the arts and literature. Museums include the Duluth Art Institute at the Depot, the Museum of Art at the of Minnesota Duluth, the Manuscript Library Museum, and smaller local art galleries. See the List of Museums in Duluth. The Public Library has three locations. Duluth is also home to a professional company, the Ballet. Duluth shares a symphony orchestra--the Duluth Superior Symphony Orchestra http://www.dsso.com--with Superior, Wisconsin. In summer free concerts are often held in Chester Park, where local musicians play for crowds. The Bayfront Blues Festival is held in early August. Beginning in 2004, Duluth has celebrated Pride with a parade on Day weekend. The city celebrates the Music Festival the first week in May each year. Started in 1998, the festival features over 130 local musical acts performing across the city. The Junior Achievement High School ROCKS - Battle of the Bands showcases middle school and high school bands from central Minnesota to the Canadian border and northern Wisconsin and takes place at the DECC in mid-April. Duluth is where the Minnesota Book Awards are given, honoring books about the region.There also exists under a section of Interstate 35 a stretch of graffiti known as the Graffiti Graveyard. It is known throughout Duluth.  Many residents remember visiting the Graffiti Graveyard during their teenage years.()Parks and recreationImage:LesterRiver Duluth.jpg|thumb|River. Lester Park Trail is one of the citys popular hiking and picnic areas.()Duluth has numerous parks.  These include six parks on Lake Superior: Brighton Beach Park, Leif Erickson Park, Canal Park on Park Point, the Lakewalk (connecting Canal Park and Leif Erickson Park via the lakeshore), Lafayette Park on Park Point, and Park Point Recreation Area at the end of Park Point, where a sand beach invites swimming in the lake.  Duluths other parks include Lester Park, Congdon Park, Hartley Park, Chester Park, the Rose Garden (next to Leif Erickson Park), Bayfront Festival Park, Cascade Park, Enger Park, Lincoln Park, Brewer Park, Fairmount Park, Indian Point Park, MagneySnively Park, and Fond du Lac Park, as well as some small neighborhood parks and athletic fields.  Lester Park, Congdon Park, Hartley Park, and Chester Park have trail systems, and three of these parksall except Hartleyalso have waterfalls, as does Lincoln Park.  Hartley Park also has a nature center.  Lester Park and Enger Park have public golf courses.  Fairmount Park has the Lake Superior Zoo.  Cooke State Park, with its famous swinging bridge (a footbridge) across the Saint Louis River, lies southwest of Duluth, just beyond the city limits.In addition to the two public golf courses (Lester Park and Enger Park), golfers can play at the Northland Country Club and the Ridgeview Country Club.  Duluth also has 5 public tennis courts and 63 private tennis club courts.  And the city has many indoor and outdoor ice rinks, including curling facilities.Duluth hosts a  segment of the Superior Hiking Trail, soon to be part of the North Country National Scenic Trail  the nations longest hiking trail.  This trail segment passes through or near Jay Cooke State Park, Elys Peak, Bardons Peak, the MagneySnively old growth forest, Spirit Mountain, Enger Park, Point of Rocks, the Lakewalk, Chester Park, UMDs Bagley nature trails, and Hartley Park. It features fabulous views of the Saint Louis River, the Twin Ports, the Aerial Bridge, and Lake Superior.Since 1977, Duluth has played host to Marathon, held annually in June.  Named after its original sponsor, Grandmas Restaurant, it draws runners from all over the world.  The course starts just outside Harbors, Minnesota, runs down Old Highway 61 (the former route of Highway 61 along the North Shore of Superior), and finishes in one of Duluths tourism neighborhoods, Park. The same route is also taken during the North Shore Inline Marathon, held in September and also drawing racers from all over the world.The Beargrease Sled Dog Marathon is Duluths annual sled dog race, held in February.  The race is named after the son of Anishinaabe Chief Makwabimidem. Beargrease was one of the first mail carriers between Harbors, Minnesota, and Marais, Minnesota. He and his brothers carried mail by dogsled, boat, and horse for almost twenty years between the two towns, which were unconnected by road. Marathon competitors can choose between two distances.  The longer  course takes a round trip from Duluth to the Waters Canoe Area.  The  course departs from Duluth and ends in Tofte, Minnesota. The marathon was first held in 1980.  It is regarded as a training ground for Alaskas larger and more elite Trail Sled Dog Race.The city is home to Duluth Curling Club, Duluth Yacht Club and the Duluth-Superior Sailing Association.Sites of interestThe noted Historic Estate, built by wealthy businessman Adgate Congdon, can be found on the shore of Lake Superior and is open to tours year-round. The Lift Bridge, spanning the short canal into Duluths harbor, is a vertical bridge.  It was originally an exceedingly rare transfer bridge--a bridge that slides a basketlike gondola back and forth to transfer people and vehicles from one side to the other. Historic Central High School towers over the harbor and features an 1890s classroom museum. The wreck of the Thomas Wilson, a classic early 20th century whaleback ore boat, lies underwater less than a mile outside the Duluth harbor ship canal. The Sundew (WLB-404), a former Seagoing Buoy Tender, is a ship along the Duluth waterfront, as is the 610 long A Irvin.Sports Professional sports history Duluth fielded a Football League team called the Kelleys (officially the Kelley Duluths after the Kelley-Duluth Hardware Store) from 19231925 and the Eskimos (officially  Nevers Eskimos after the early NFL great, their star player) from 1926-1927. The Eskimos were then sold and became the Tornadoes (New Jersey). This bit of history became the basis for the 2008 George Clooney/Renee Zellweger movie, Leatherheads.The Dukes of the Northern League Independent Professional Baseball played in West Duluths Stadium from the leagues inception in 1993 until 2002 when the team moved to Kansas City, Kan., and became the City T-Bones. The Dukes were Northern League champions in 1997. An earlier Northern League, based in the Midwest, was also in operation off and on from 1902 to 1971, the longest stint being 1932-1971. The Dukes were a farm team for the Detroit Tigers from 19601964 and several other teams in later years before the Northern League folded in 1971. The Dukes produced notable players such as Denny McLain, Bill Freehan, Gates Brown, Ray Oyler, Jim Northrup, Mickey Stanley, John Hiller, and Willie Horton, all of whom were members of the 1968 world champion Detroit Tigers.Duluth is also home to Hortons Gym, the home gym of professional boxers Zach Jungle Boy Walters and Kolle, as well as a number of other professional prizefighters. Amateur sports The of Minnesota Duluth Bulldog hockey games are a major event in town during the cold Duluth winters. Games used to be televised locally, and thousands watched the games in person at the Duluth Entertainment Convention Center (DECC). A new hockey arena, Amsoil Arena, opened Dec. 30, 2010, adjacent to the DECC. Several Bulldogs, including hockey great Hull, have gone on to success in the Hockey League. The UMD womens ice hockey team has won five NCAA Division I national championships (200103, 2008, 2010.) The 2010 title game against Cornell University lasted through nearly three full overtimes and was the longest womens ice hockey championship game in NCAA history. The 2003 womens Frozen Four tournament was played at the DECC with the Bulldogs claiming their third consecutive national title by defeating Harvard University via a dramatic double-overtime goal by Nora Tallus in front of a sellout home crowd. The 2008 Frozen Four tournament was also held at the DECC and saw the Bulldogs claim their fourth national title with a 4-0 shutout of the Wisconsin Badgers. On April 9, 2011, the Bulldog mens team defeated Michigan to win their first national championship in school history. The Womens Frozen Four tournament will be held at Amsoil Arena in 2012.The Huskies is a college summer wood bat league baseball team based in Duluth and playing in the League. The team plays its home games at Stadium. The roster includes some of the top college baseball players in the country. The Huskies play 34 home games each summer between June and August.The DuluthSuperior Shoremen is a semi-professional football team based in Duluths Public Schools Stadium. It is in the Mid-American Football League and placed second in that leagues championship game in 2005.The Duluth Xpress is an amateur baseball team that plays its games at the Ordean Middle School baseball field. The team is made up of current and former college players and former professional players. The Xpress competes in the Arrowhead League, a class B league in Minnesota town team baseball.The Duluth Padres Baseball Club plays its home games at Bulldog Park on the campus of the University of Minnesota Duluth. The Padres is an amateur team composed of former high school players and current and former college players.  The team competes in the Upper 13 League of the Wisconsin Baseball Association. The team was established in 2007 and played its first three seasons in Proctor, Minnesota, as the Proctor Padres. The Padres moved to Duluth in 2010 and changed its name to the Duluth Padres in 2011.Dynamo Duluth plays bandy.() That makes Duluth one of only a few spots in the country where that sport exists.  All league matches are played at John Rose Minnesota Oval in Roseville. The Harbor City Roller Dames, founded in 2007, is DuluthSuperiors first womens flat-track roller derby league.  Harbor City Roller Dames Dames is a 19+ league.  There is also a second derby league in the DuluthSuperior area called Duluth Derby Divas. Unlike HCRD, it is an 18+ league. It practices at the armory in Cloquet, Minnesota, on Tuesdays.Marathon is a marathon ran between Two Harbors and Duluth.  It is ran in June and ends at Canal Park near Grandmas Restaurant.Films, television shows and recordings in Duluth*The Test Dummies recorded Songs of the Unforgiven (2004) during a live performance at the Sacred Heart Church in Duluth*TV Series: Power, Privilege & Justice, Mystery in the Mansion (2005)  Filmed at Mansion and aired on truTV*TV Series: Mystery Diagnosis (2005)  Aired on the Channel*Battleground Minnesota  Release Date: September 1, 2005  A documentary movie about the 2004 presidential elections in Minnesota*Sydmeni laulu  Release Date: July 2, 1948  Finnish documentary movie*Minnesota: Land of Plenty  Release Date: January 31, 1942  Documentary short subject by A. Fitzpatrick*Will  Release date: January 14, 1994  Movie filmed in Duluth. This Walt Disney Pictures family and adventure film was directed by Charles Haid and based on the true story of Albert Campbell, who won a  dog sled race race from Winnipeg, Manitoba to Saint Paul, Minnesota in 1917. The movie stars Mackenzie Astin, Kevin Spacey, David Ogden Stiers, George Gerdes, Brian Cox, Penelope Windust and August Schellenberg*Youll Like My Mother  Release date: October 13, 1972  Feature film shot on location in and around Duluth, principally at Historic Estate. Released by Universal Studios, this thriller stars Duke as a very pregnant Francesca Kinsolving, who travels thousands of miles to meet the mother of her dead soldier husband for the first time. The coldhearted and distant mother-in-law, played by Murphy, is forced to take in Francesca because of a raging blizzard. The longer Francesca is trapped in the house, the more she discovers the disturbing secrets about her mother-in-law and the family. Co-starring Thomas (actor) and Sian Barbara Allen*Far North  Release date: November 11, 1988  Feature film shot on location in and around Duluth. Written and directed by Shepard and starring Lange, Durning, Arquette, and HarperSet in DuluthThe short lived 1996 sitcom The Louie Show(The Louie Show (1996) - Plot Summary) was set in Duluth. Anderson played psychotherapist Louie Lundgren.() The opening title sequence featured downtown Duluth buildings.The 1983 Vidal novel Duluth was set in a stylized version of Duluth.The 2008 American sports comedy film Leatherheads, starring and directed by Clooney, was set in Duluth. (Leatherheads was actually filmed in North and Carolina.)  The film featured a fictitious football team called the Bulldogs.M. Dischs 1965 alien-invasion novel Genocides is set primarily in a fictional community in adjacent Lake County called Tassel. A pivotal scene in the beginning of chapter four treats the incineration of the city of Duluth by the extraterrestrial invaders machines with some detail, even mentioning downtown Duluths Alworth Building and including a group of characters escape along Highway 61.Notable residents and natives*Aguirre, professional snowboarder, attended 2006 Winter Olympics*Arnold (Olson), American actress and the first wife of baseball player DiMaggio*Bamford, comedian and actor*Culkin Banning, best-selling author of 36 novels, early womens rights advocate*Berry, drummer for the band R.E.M.*Bly, author*Adgate Congdon, lawyer and capitalist*Copi, Philosopher, logician and textbook author*John H. Darling, engineer and astronomer*Devine, Captain of UMD football team, later coached Notre Dame and Green Bay Packers*Dylan, Grammy and Award winning folk singer inducted into the and Roll Hall of Fame (1988)*Goucher, distance runner and 2008 Olympian*Grimsby, journalist, television news anchor and actor*Hull, professional hockey player, played for UMD*Bill Irwin, professional wrestler, best known for his stint in the WWF as The Goon.*Isabell (19522009), event planner.(Weber, Bruce. Robert Isabell, Who Turned Events Into Wondrous Occasions, Dies at 57, New York Times, July 10, 2009. Accessed July 14, 2009.)*Knudsen, film actress, appeared in The Big Sleep and A Stolen Life *LaFontaine, voiceover artist famous for recording film trailers, television advertisements, network promotions and video game trailers.*Lewis, author and Nobel laureate, wrote the novel Timberlane while resident in Duluth*The Iron Brothers, the Merritt brothers of Duluth, discovered iron ore in 1890 in the Iron Range.*Murphy, Asylum band member and founder*Music, voice actor, though born in New York, was raised and educated in Duluth*Lee Nolin, TV Actress*Oreck, entrepreneur and businessman*Parr, musician*Paulucci, businessman*Pence,scholar and social activist. Created the Model of intervention in domestic violence*Plys, Olympic curler*Rickert, basketball player for the Zealand Breakers*Shuster, Olympic curling medalist*Solem, musician*Sommer, artist*Sparhawk and Parker founding members of the alternative rock group Low*by Turtles, a bluegrass band, hails from Duluth and refers to the city in several songs*Williams, NHL player*Williams (19401992), NHL player, Winter Olympics gold medalistSister citiesDuluth has four cities as designated by Cities International:()* Petrozavodsk, Russia* Vxj, Sweden* hara, now Isumi, Japan* Bay, Ontario, Canada See also *Observatory*Model*of people from Duluth, Minnesota*of Duluth, MinnesotaNotesReferences**Macdonald, Dora Mary (1950).  This is Duluth.  Central High School Printing Department.  Reprinted by Paradigm Press (1999).  ISBN 1-889924-03-2*External links* *City of Duluth  Official Website*Duluth Area Chamber of Commerce website*Duluth Public Library website*Perfect Duluth Day*Twin Ports Nightlife*Vintage Pictures of Duluth*(, )(Minnesota)da:Duluth(Minnesota)et:Duluth(Minnesota)fr:Duluth( )MinnesotaMinnesotaMinnesotaos:(Minnesota)MinnesotaMinnesotalt:Dulutashu:Duluth(Minnesota)()(Minnesota)(Minnesota)pt:Duluthru:fi:Duluthsv:DuluthMinnesota(Minnesota)zh:
64704
Economy_of_Iran
spelling             USThe economy of Iran is the eighteenth largest in the world by power parity (PPP) and according to iranian officials claims is going to become the 12th largest by 2015.(Statistics, World Bank (2010), Retrieved January 30, 2011.)( The economy of Iran is a economy with a large public sector and some 50% of the economy centrally planned.(Iran privatizes $63bn of state assets. PressTV, November 29, 2009. Retrieved January 28, 2010.)(A survey of Iran: Stunted and distorted. The Economist (2003)) It is also a diversifed economy with over 40 industries directly involved in the Stock Exchange.() Yet, most of the countrys exports are oil and gas, accounting for a majority of government revenue in 2010.(Iran oil exports top 844mn barrels. PressTV, June 16, 2010. Retrieved June 16, 2010.) A unique feature of Irans economy is the presence of large religious foundations, whose combined budgets make up more than 30% of central government spending.(Bonyad-e Mostazafan va Janbazan Oppressed and Disabled Veterans Foundation (MJF). Globalsecurity.org. Retrieved February 6, 2011.) Iran is one of the few major economies that has maintained positive growth in the aftermath of  the 2008 global financial crisis, despite sanctions imposed by the international community as a result of the countrys nuclear program.(Farnaz Fassihi: Irans Economy Feels Sting of Sanctions. Wall Street Journal, October 12, 2010. Retrieved October 13, 2010.)(Tehran exchange extends advance. Financial Times, August 25, 2010 (subscription required). Retrieved November 8, 2010.)Distortions resulting from a combination of price controls and subsidies, particularly on food and energy,()() continue to burden the economy. Contraband, administrative controls, widespread corruption,(Iran falls to 168 in Corruption Perception Index. Transparency International (2009). Retrieved November 19, 2009.)(Iran Country Report. Freedom House (2007). Retrieved October 29, 2009.) and other restrictive factors undermine the potential for private sector-led growth.() High oil prices in recent years have enabled Iran to amass well over $100 billion in foreign exchange reserves.(Iran Has Foreign Exchange Reserves Topping $100 Billion, Ahmadinejad Says. Bloomberg, October 30, 2010. Retrieved November 28, 2010.)() Whilst this has aided self-sufficiency and domestic investment, double-digit unemployment and inflation remain problematic.( Irans educated population, economic inefficiency, and insufficient foreign and domestic investment have prompted an increasing number of Iranians to seek employment overseas, resulting in a significant brain drain.()()HistoryPrior to 1979, Irans economic development was rapid. Traditionally an agricultural society, by the 1970s the country had undergone significant industrialization and economic modernization.(( This pace of growth had slowed dramatically by 1978 as capital flight reached $30 to $40 billion US dollars just before the revolution.(Shirin Hakimzadeh. Iran: A Vast Diaspora Abroad and Millions of Refugees at Home. Migration information source (2006). Retrieved July 18, 2009.)The governments long-term objectives since the revolution have been economic independence, employment, and a comfortable standard of living for citizens, but at the end of the 20th century, the countrys economy faced many obstacles.() Irans population more than from doubled between 1980 and 2000 and grew increasingly younger. Although a relatively large number of Iranians are farmers, agricultural production has consistently fallen since the 1960s. By the late 1990s, Iran had become a major importer of food. At that time, economic hardship in the countryside resulted in vast numbers of people moving to cities.(Following the nationalizations in 1979 and the outbreak of the War, over 80% of Irans economy came under the control of the government.( After hostilities with Iraq ceased in 1988, the government tried to develop the countrys communication, transportation, manufacturing, health care, education and energy sectors (including its prospective nuclear power facilities), and began the process of integrating its communication and transportation infrastructure with that of neighboring states.() The eight-year war with Iraq claimed at least 300,000 Iranian lives and injured more than 500,000. The cost of the war to the countrys economy was some $500 billion.()(Iran-Iraq war (1980-1988). Globalsecurity.org. Retrieved October 21, 2009.)Macro-economic trendsIn the early 21st century the service sector constituted the largest percentage of domestic product (GDP), followed by industry (mining and manufacturing) and agriculture. In 2008 GDP was estimated at $382.3 billion ($842 billion by PPP), or $5,470 per capita ($12,800 by PPP).( The GDP figure is projected to double in the next five years.(Irans GDP to grow by $55.5B. The Economist, April 6, 2010. Retrieved April 7, 2010.) Irans economy is also important.( On account of these figures and the countrys small but diversified industrial base, the Nations classifies Irans economy as semi-developed (1998).( Due to huge energy subsidies, it is one of the most energy-inefficient countries in the world, with intensity three times that of the global average and 2.5 times higher than the middle eastern average.(Reza Taghizadeh (June 9, 2010): Sanctions And Irans Achilles Heel. Radio Free Europe. Retrieved October 13, 2010.) In 2009 the ratio of research to GDP was 0.87% against the governments medium-term target of 2.5%.(Memorandum  The foreign trade regime of the Islamic Republic of Iran. of Commerce (Iran) (2009). Retrieved April 8, 2010.) According to Sachs, Iran has the strong possibility of becoming one of the worlds largest economies in the 21st century.(The N-11: More Than an Acronym. Sachs, March 28, 2007. Retrieved February 6, 2011.)(Iran Ranks 3rd Among Newly-Emerged Economies. Zawaya, October 26, 2010. Retrieved October 26, 2010.)Fiscal and monetary policySince the 1979 revolution, government spending has averaged 59% on social policies, 17% on economic matters, 15% on national defense, and 13% on general affairs.( Between social and economic affairs, payments have averaged 39% on education, health and social security, 20% on other social affairs, 3% on agriculture, 16% on water, power and gas, 5% on manufacturing and mining, 12% on roads and transportation and 5% on other economic affairs.( Irans gross net investment was 27.7% of GDP in 2009.( Between 2002 and 2006, the rate of inflation fluctuated around 14%.() In 2008, around 55% of the governments revenue came from oil and natural gas revenue, with 31% derived from taxes and fees.(Crude price pegged at dlrs 39.6 a barrel under next years budget. IRNA, January 27, 2008. Retrieved December 5, 2008.)(Irans entry. Foreign and CommonWealth Office (2010). Retrieved June 21, 2009.) The budget for the year 2011 was $500 billion (5,170 trillion rials) based on an oil price of $80 per barrel, an increase of 45% on 2010.(Ladane Nasseri (April 27, 2011): Iran Parliament Cut Budget 2.25% Before Approval, Donya Reports. Bloomberg. Retrieved May 5, 2011.)The budget is based on an oil price of $80 per barrel. The value of the US dollar is estimated at IRR 10,500 for the same period.(Iran Majlis to discuss budget bill. PressTV, April 23, 2011. Retrieved May 5, 2011.)Iran had around $100 billion in foreign reserves at the start of 2009( and balances its external payments by pricing oil at approximately $75 per barrel.(The Oil and Gas Industry. Iran Primer (PBS), October 26, 2010. Retrieved October 27, 2010.) According to the head of the Department of Statistics of Iran, if the rules of budgeting were observed in this very structure, the government could save at least 30 to 35% on its expenses.(Ten Million Iranians Under Absolute Poverty Line. Radio Zamaneh. Retrieved May 5, 2011.)Five-year socio-economic development planFile:USD-IRR exchange rate.JPG|thumb|right|Since adopting a managed rate in 2003, the Rials value has remained relatively stable.The fifth development plan for the period 201015 sets guidelines for the socio-economic development of the country. Designed to give power to the people through delegation,(The fifth Iranian development plan. PressTV, January 19, 2010. Retrieved January 20, 2010.) the plan is part of Vision 2025, a strategy for long-term sustainable growth. Under the plan, following annual approval of the governments budget, the Bank of Iran will present a detailed monetary and credit policy to the Money and Credit Council (MCC) for approval. Thereafter, major elements of these policies will be incorporated into the five-year economic development plan.( postscript ) According to the IMF, Iran is in transition to a market economy from a planned economy.()Economic reform planExpansion of public healthcare and international relations are the other main objectives of the fifth plan, an ambitious series of measures that include subsidy reform, banking, currency, taxation, customs, construction, employment, the development of nationwide distribution of goods and services, social justice and productivity. The main intention is to make the country self-sufficient by 2015.(Iran Investment Monthly. Turquoise Partners (January 2011). Retrieved January 31, 2011.)()(Planned Economic Reforms. Atieh Bahar (2008). Retrieved May 24, 2009.) By removing energy subsidies, Irans long term intention is to make its industries more efficient and competitive on the world stage.(Iran to Cut Oil Subsidies in Energy Reform. International Monetary Fund, September 28, 2010. Retrieved October 13, 2010.) These reforms target the major sources of inefficiency and price distortion in the countrys economy and are likely to lead to major restructuring of almost all economic sectors.( The banking sector in Iran is seen as a potential hedge against the removal of subsidies, as the plan is not expected to have a direct impact on banks.(Iran Investment Monthly. Turquoise Partners (October 2010). Retrieved October 30, 2010.) Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has stated that the country will become the worlds 12th largest economy by 2015.(Iran to be worlds 12th economy in 2015. PressTV, December 24, 2010. Retrieved December 25, 2010.)Centralization and privatizationFollowing the cessation of hostilities with Iraq in 1988, the Iranian Government declared its intention to privatize most state industries in an effort to stimulate the war-torn economy. The sale of state-owned factories and companies proceeded slowly, mainly due to opposition by a nationalist majority in the Iranian parliament. By 2006 most industries, some 70% of the economy, remained state-owned.( The majority of heavy industries including steel, petrochemicals, copper, automobiles, and machine tools remained in the public sector, with most light industry privately owned.(File:Foolad Mobarakeh50.jpg|thumb|left|Mobarakeh in Esfahan is Irans largest steel mill listed on the Stock Exchange.(Monthly Bulletin. Tehran Stock Exchange (June 2010). Retrieved April 4, 2011.) In recent years, Iran has resumed its drive towards privatization.Article 44 of the Constitution stipulates that the countrys economy should consist of state, cooperative, and private sectors based on systematic and sound planning. The state sector includes all large-scale industries, foreign trade, major minerals, banking, insurance, power generation, dams and large-scale irrigation networks, radio and television, post, telegraph and telephone services, aviation, shipping, roads, railroads and the like. These will all be publicly owned and administered by the State. Cooperative companies and enterprises concerned with production and distribution in urban and rural areas form the basis of the cooperative sector and will be operated in accordance with law. As of 2008, 120,000 cooperatives were in operation across the country employing about 15 million people.(120,000 cooperatives operating in Iran. Iran Daily, June 30, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.) The private sector consists of enterprises concerned with construction, agriculture, animal husbandry, industry, trade, and services that supplement the economic activities of the state and cooperative sectors.(Iranian Constitution. University of Bern (2010). Retrieved February 2, 2011.)Since strict interpretation of Article 44 has never been enforced in Iran, the private sector has played a much larger role than that outlined in the constitution.(Call for Prioritizing Vision 2025. Iran Daily, February 12, 2009. Retrieved March 22, 2011.) As a result, in recent years the role of this sector has increased whilst a 2004 amendment to the constitution allows 80% of state assets to be privatized. Forty percent of such sales are to be conducted through the Justice Shares scheme and the rest through the Stock Exchange. The government will retain ownership of the remaining 20%.(Justice Shares Payment Soon. Iran Daily, December 23, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.)() In 2005, government assets were estimated at around $120 billion. Some $63 billion of such assets were privatized in the period 2005&ndash;2010, reducing the governments direct share of gross domestic product (GDP) from 80% to 40%.(Iran privatizes $63bn of state assets. PressTV, November 29, 2009. Retrieved November 29, 2009.)Iranian Revolutionary Guard CorpsThe Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) are thought to control about one third of Irans economy through a series of subsidiaries and trusts.((Irans Guards in $2.5bn rail deal. BBC, November 11, 2009. Retrieved November 12, 2009.)() Estimates by the Angeles Times suggest the IRGC has ties to over one hundred companies and an annual revenue in excess of $12 billion in business (construction in particular).() The Iranian Ministry of Petroleum has awarded the IRGC billions of dollars in contracts as well as major infrastructure projects.() Tasked with control of Irans borders, the IRGC maintains a monopoly on smuggling, costing Iranian companies billions of dollars in lost business opportunities each year.( The smuggling itself is encouraged in part by the generous subsidization of domestic goods (including fuel). IRGC also runs laser eye-surgery clinics, makes cars, builds bridges and roads and is a developer of oil and gas fields.()Religious foundationsWelfare programs for the needy are managed by more than 30 public agencies alongside semi-state organizations known as bonyads, together with several private non-governmental organizations. In 2003, the government began consolidation of its welfare organizations in order to eliminate redundancy and inefficiency. The bonyads are a consortium of over 120 organizations which are tax-exempt and in receipt of government subsidies and religious donations. They answer directly to the Leader of Iran and control over 20% of Irans GDP.((Abrahamian, History of Modern Iran (p.178). Cambridge University Press (2008), ISBN 978-0521528917) Operating everything from vast soybean and cotton fields to hotels, soft drinks, auto-manufacturing and shipping lines, the bonyads are seen as overstaffed, corrupt, and generally not profitable.(Dr. Abbas Bakhtiar (2007): Ahmadinejads Achilles Heel: The Iranian Economy. Payvand. Retrieved 12 February 2008.) Bonyad companies also compete with Irans unprotected private sector, whose firms complain of the difficulty of competing with bonyad firms whose political connections provide government permits and subsidies, which eliminate worries over the need to make a profit in many market sectors.(Labor and welfareExperts believe that annual economic growth of above 5% is necessary to absorb the 750,000 new labor force entrants each year.(Govt Set to Change Economic Course. Iran Daily, June 24, 2008. Retrieved June 5, 2009.) Agriculture contributes just over 11% to the national product and employs one third of the labor force.( As of 2004 the sector, which includes mining, manufacturing, and construction, contributed 42% of GDP and employed 31% of the labor force.( Mineral products, notably petroleum, account for 80% of Irans export revenues, even though mining employs less than 1% of the countrys labor force.( In 2004 the service sector ranked as the largest contributor to GDP (48%) and employed 44% of workforce.( Women made up 33% of the labor force in 2005.(Valentine M. Moghadam (2009). Where Are Irans Working Women?. The Middle East Institute. Retrieved February 3, 2011.) More than two-thirds of the population (74 million people) is under the age of 30 while net enrollment at primary school level is almost 100%, preluding a secondary demographic boom in Iran in the coming years.(Country Reports - Iran. UNESCO (2000). Retrieved February 5, 2011.)(Iranian unemployment rate not reduced to target. PressTV, January 26, 2010. Retrieved January 26, 2010.)(Table H United Nations Development Program (2009). Retrieved February 5, 2011.)Personal incomeIran is classed as a middle income country and has made significant progress in provision of health and education services in the period covered by the Development Goals (MDGs). In 2010, Irans average monthly income was about $500 (per capita in 2009: $10,900 by PPP).(()(Iran Dat by country: Iran, Islamic Rep. World Bank (2011). Retrieved February 5, 2011.) There is a minimum national wage applicable to each sector of activity fixed by the Supreme Labor Council. In 2009 this was about $263 per month ($3,156 per year).(Irans Poor Face a Logjam in the Labyrinths of Work. ILNA.ir, October 21, 2009. Retrieved January 24, 2010.) The Bank reports that in 2001, approximately 20% of household consumption was spent on food, 32% on fuel, 12% on health care, and 8% on education.(Iran - Income. Encyclopedia of the Nations. Retrieved October 14, 2010.)The poverty line in Tehran for the year ending March 20, 2008 was $9,612, while the national average poverty line was $4,932.(2933% of Iranians live below poverty line. PressTV, June 6, 2009. Retrieved June 7, 2009.) In 2010, Irans Department of Statistics announced that 10 million Iranians live under the absolute poverty line and 30 million live under the relative poverty line.(Ten Million Iranians Under Absolute Poverty Line. Radio Zamaneh, May 29, 2010. Retrieved May 28, 2010.)Social securityAlthough Iran does not possess universal social protection, in 1996, the Iranian Center for Statistics estimated that more than 73% of the Iranian population was covered by social security.() Membership of the social security system for all employees is compulsory.()Social security ensures employee protection against unemployment, disease, old age, and occupational accidents.( In 2003 the minimum standard pension was 50% of the workers earnings but no less than the minimum wage.( Iran spent 22.5% of its 2003 national budget on welfare programs of which more than 50% covered pension costs.()Employees between the age of 18 and 65 years are covered by the social security system with financing shared between the employee (7% of salary), the employer (2023%) and the state, which in turn supplements the contribution of the employer up to a total value of 3%. Provision of social security is extended to self-employed workers, who voluntarily contribute between 12% and 18% of income depending on the protection sought.(Irans entry. U.S. Social Security Administration. Retrieved October 14, 2010.) Civil servants, the regular military, law enforcement agencies, and the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps all have their own pension systems.(Iran - The pension system in Iran. World Bank (2003). Retrieved February 3, 2011.)Trade unionsAlthough Iranian workers have a theoretical right to form labor unions, in actuality there is no union system in the country. Ostensible worker representation is provide by the by the Workers House, a state-sponsored institution that nevertheless attempts to challenge some state policies.(Irans entry. International Labor Organization (2001). Retrieved February 3, 2011.) Guild unions operate locally in most areas but are limited largely to issuing credentials and licenses. The right of workers to strike is generally not respected by the state. Since 1979 strikes have often been met by police action.(Irans New Labor? Frontline (PBS), January 28, 2010. Retrieved February 3, 2011.)A comprehensive Iranian labor law covers all facets of labor relations, including hiring of local and foreign staff. This provides a broad and inclusive definition of the individuals it covers, with written, oral, temporary and indefinite employment contracts all recognized. Considered employee-friendly, the labor law makes it extremely difficult to lay off staff. Employing personnel on consecutive six-month contracts (a practice that is used to avoid paying benefits) is illegal, as is dismissing staff without proof of a serious offense. Labor disputes are settled by a special labor council, which usually rules in favor of the employee.(Sectors of the economyAgriculture and foodstuffsFile:Iran major crops78.jpg|thumb|right|Wheat, the most important crop, is grown mainly in the west and northwest whilst rice is the major crop in the Caspian region. Agriculture contributes just over 11% to the national product and employs a third of the labor force.(About 11% of Irans land is arable,( with the main food-producing areas located in the Caspian region and in the valleys of the northwest. Some northern and western areas support rain-fed agriculture, whilst others require irrigation for successful crop production.()Primitive farming methods, overworked and under-fertilized soil, poor seed and scarcity of water are the principal obstacles to agricultural production. About one third of total cultivated land is irrigated. Construction of multipurpose dams and reservoirs along rivers in the Zagros and Alborz mountains have increased the amount of water available for irrigation. Agricultural production is increasing as a result of modernization, mechanization, improvements to crops and livestock  as well as land redistribution programs.() Wheat, the most important crop, is grown mainly in the west and northwest whilst rice is the major crop in the Caspian region. Other crops produced are barley, corn, cotton, sugar beets, tea, hemp, tobacco, fruits, potatoes, legumes (beans and lentils), vegetables, fodder plants (alfalfa and clover), almonds, walnuts and spices including cumin and  sumac. Iran is also the worlds largest producer of saffron, pistachios, berberis and berries as well as the second largest producer of dates.(Commodities by country - Iran. FAO Statistics (2010). Retrieved January 30, 2010.)( The countrys meat and dairy products include lamb, goat meat, beef, poultry, milk, eggs, butter and cheese. Wool and leather are also produced whilst honey is collected from beehives and silk harvested from silkworm cocoons. Forestry products from the heavily wooded northern slopes of the Mountains are economically important although the cutting of trees is strictly controlled by the government, which also runs a reforestation program. Rivers that drain into the Caspian Sea are fished for salmon, carp, trout, pike and sturgeon, from which caviar is harvested to make Iran the worlds largest producer.((Business | Crunch time for Caspian caviar. BBC News, June 19, 2001. Retrieved January 30, 2010.)Since the 1979 revolution commercial farming has replaced subsistence farming as the dominant mode of agricultural production. By 1997, the gross value of Irans agricultural sector products reached $25 billion.( Iran has attained 90% self-sufficiency in essential agricultural products, although rice production fails to meet domestic demand thereby making substantial imports necessary. In 2007 Iran reached self-sufficiency in wheat production and for the first time became a net wheat exporter.(Trade With PGCC To Improve. Iran Daily, December 31, 2007. Retrieved July 23, 2010.) By 2003, a quarter of Irans non-oil exports were of agricultural products.(The Case Study of The Islamic Republic of Iran. World Bank, June 10, 2004. Retrieved April 7, 2008.) Major exports in this category include fresh and dried fruits, nuts, animal hides, processed foods, and spices.(ManufacturingFile:Industry-Iran-map.jpg|thumb|right|Iran has a diversified and broad industrial base. In 1998, the Nations classified Irans economy as semi-developed.Large-scale factory based manufacturing began in the 1920s and has developed gradually. During the War, Iraq bombed many of Irans petrochemical plants, damaging the large oil refinery at Abadan where production came to a halt. Reconstruction of the refinery began in 1988 and production resumed in 1993. In spite of the war, many small factories sprang up to produce import-substitution goods and materials needed by the military.(Irans Defense Industry. Globalsecurity.org. Retrieved February 3, 2011.)Irans major manufactured products are petrochemicals, steel, and copper products. Other important manufactures include automobiles, home and electric appliances, telecommunications equipment, cement and industrial machinery. Iran has gradually become the largest operational base of industrial robots in West Asia.(IFRstat.org. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, October 11, 2005. Retrieved July 23, 2010.) Other products include paper, rubber products, agricultural products, processed foods, leather products and pharmaceuticals. In 2000, textile mills, using domestic cotton and wool such as Tehran Patou and Iran Termeh employed around 400,000 people around  Tehran, Isfahan and along the Caspian coast.(Textile Smuggling Harms Domestic Production. Iran Daily, July 1, 2009. Retrieved July 23, 2010.)(Textile factories in trouble. Iran Daily, January 15, 2007. Retrieved September 11, 2009.)According to Economist, Iran was ranked 39th in a list of industrialized nations, producing $23 billion of industrial products in 2008.( Iran 39th Industrialized Country. The Economist, May 27, 2009. Retrieved July 23, 2010.) Between 2008 to 2009 Iran leaped to 28th from 69th place in annual industrial production growth.()A 2003 report by the Nations Industrial Development Organization regarding small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) in Iran(Irans Small and Medium Enterprises. The United Nations Industrial Development Organization (2003). Retrieved February 2, 2010.) identified the following impediments to industrial development:*Lack of monitoring institutions;*An inefficient banking system;*Insufficient research & development;*A shortage of managerial skills;*Corruption;*Inefficient taxation;*Socio-cultural apprehensions;*The absence of social learning loops;*Shortcomings in international market awareness necessary for global competition,*Cumbersome bureaucratic procedures;*A shortage of skilled labor;*Lack of intellectual property protection;*Inadequate social capital, social responsibility and socio-cultural values.Despite these problems, recent studies reveal that over the past few years Iran has progressed rapidly in various scientific and technological fields. Major advancements have taken place in the petrochemical, pharmaceutical, aerospace, defense, and heavy industry sectors. Even in the face of U.S. economic sanctions, Iran appears to be emerging as an country.(Torbat, Akbar (2010): Industrialization and Dependency: the Case of Iran. ECO Economic Journal. Retrieved February 5, 2011.)HandicraftsIran has a long tradition of producing artisan goods including carpets, ceramics, copperware and brassware, glass, leather goods, textiles, and wooden artifacts. The countrys rich carpet-weaving tradition dates from pre-Islamic times and remains an important industry contributing substantial amounts to rural incomes. An estimated 1.2 million weavers in Iran produce carpets for both domestic and international export markets .()More than $500 million worth of hand-woven carpets are exported each year, accounting for 30% of the 2008 world market .(Health Insurance for Carpet Weavers. Iran Daily, December 16, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.)(Irans oldest craft left behind. Financial Times, February 10, 2010 (subscription required). Retrieved February 10, 2009.) Around 5.2 million people work in some 250 fields of the handicraft industry and contribute 3% of GDP.(Irans Handicrafts.  PressTV, January 6, 2010. Retrieved January 10, 2010.)Automobile manufacturingFile:EF7 Dual-Fuel Front.jpg|thumb|right|170px|EF Engines are made by Khodro. Iran is the 12th biggest automaker in the world.As of 2001, there were 13 public and privately owned automakers within Iran, of which Khodro and Saipa accounted for 94% of total domestic production. Iran Khodros Paykan, replaced by the Samand in 2005, is the predominant car brand in the country. With 61% of the market in 2001, Iran Khodro was the largest player, whilst Saipa contributed 33% of Irans total production in the same year. Other car manufacturers, such as the Group, Kerman Motors, Khodro, Raniran, Traktorsazi, Shahab Khodro and others accounted for 6% of the total market.(Iran Automotive Industry. Atieh Bahar (2003). Retrieved November 14, 2008.) These automakers produce a wide range of automobiles including motorbikes, passenger cars such as Saipas Tiba, vans, mini trucks, medium sized trucks, heavy duty trucks, minibuses, large size buses and other heavy automobiles used for commercial and private activities in the country. In 2009 Iran ranked fifth in car production growth standing next to China, Taiwan, Romania and India.() Iran ranked the worlds 12th biggest automaker in 2010 and has a fleet of 11.5 million cars.()(Iran 16th Biggest Automaker. Iran Daily, June 12, 2007. Retrieved February 12, 2008.)(Gasoline Quota Will Change In Two Months. Iran Daily, July 4, 2007. Retrieved February 12, 2008.)(Iran ranks 2nd in using gas-fueled cars. Tehran Times, September 20, 2010. Retrieved November 29, 2010.) Iran had a total production of 1,395,421 cars in 2010, including 35,901 commercial vehicles.()Defense industryIn 2007 the Institute for Strategic Studies estimated Irans defense budget at $7.31 billion, equivalent to 2.6% of GDP or $102 per capita, ranking it 25th in global defense expenditure. The countrys defence industry has advanced in the past 25 years and now manufactures many types of arms and equipment. Since 1992, Irans Defense Industries Organization (DIO) has produced its own tanks, armored personnel carriers, guided missiles, radar systems, a guided missile destroyer, military vessels, submarines, and a fighter plane.(Iran Launches Production of Stealth Sub. Associated Press, May 10, 2005. Retrieved 13 February 2008.) In 2006 Iran exported weapons to 57 countries, including NATO members, and sold $100 million worth of military equipment abroad.(IRI exports warfare to 50 countries. IRIB, April 23, 2005. Retrieved February 12, 2008.)(Iran exports military equipment. IRIB, September 3, 2006. Retrieved 12 February 2008.)(Advanced attack chopper joins Iran fleet. PressTV, May 24, 2009. Retrieved May 24, 2009.)Construction and real estateFile:Tehranwnight34w.jpg|thumb|left|Tehran skyline at night. Seventy percent of the Iranians own homes.(70% of Population Own Homes. Iran Daily, April 9, 2007. Retrieved October 23, 2010.)Until the early 1950s Irans construction industry remained largely in the hands of small domestic companies. Increased income from oil and gas and the availability of easy credit triggered a subsequent building boom that attracted major international construction firms to the country. This growth continued until the mid-1970s when a sharp rise in inflation and a credit squeeze caused the boom to collapse. The construction industry had revived somewhat by the mid-1980s, although housing shortages and speculation have remain serious problems, especially in large urban centers. As of January 2011, the banking sector, particularly Maskan, has given loans up to 102 trillion rials ($10.2 billion) to applicants of Mehr housing scheme.($10b Allocated for Mehr Housing. Iran Daily, January 13, 2011. Retrieved April 3, 2011.) Construction is one of the most important sectors in Iran accounting for 2050% of total private investment in urban areas and one of the prime investment targets of well off Iranians.( Annual turnover in the construction industry amounted to $38.4 billion in 2005 and $32.8 billion in 2011.(Construction in Iran. Australian Trade (2007). Retrieved July 23, 2010.)(Iran Infrastructure Report. Business Monitor International (Q1 2011). Retrieved March 22, 2011.) Seventy percent of Iranians own their own homes.(70% of Population Own Homes. Iran Daily, April 9, 2007. Retrieved 12 February 2008.) Because of poor construction quality, many buildings stand in need of anti-seismic reinforcement or renovation.(Housing for All. Iran Daily, April 13, 2009. Retrieved July 23, 2010.) Iran also has a large dam building industry.(Simultaneous Dam, Spillways Construction Obligatory  30% Drinking Water Wasted. Iran Daily, November 29, 2006. Retrieved 12 February 2008.)Mines and metalsMineral production contributed only 0.6% of the countrys GDP in 2011,(Irans mineral exports up 39 percent. PressTV (2011). Retrieved February 3, 2011.) a figure that increases to 4% when other mining-related industries are included. Factors including lack of suitable infrastructure, legal barriers, exploration difficulties, and government control over all resources account for such low figures.()Although the petroleum industry provides the majority of revenue, about 75% of all mining sector employees work in mines producing minerals other than oil and natural gas.( These include coal, iron ore, copper, lead, zinc, chromium, barite, salt, gypsum, molybdenum, strontium, silica, uranium, and gold, the latter of which is a mainly a by-product of the Cheshmeh copper complex operation.((Philip M. Mobbs (2004): The mineral industry of Iran. Parstimes. Retrieved February 3, 2011.) The mine at Sar Cheshmeh in Province is home to the worlds second largest lode of copper ore.()Large iron ore deposits exist in central Iran, near Bafq, Yazd, and Kerman. The government owns 90% of all mines and related large industries in Iran and is seeking foreign investment to development of the mining sector.( The sector accounts for 3% of the countrys exports.(Iran has recoverable coal reserves of nearly 1.9 billion tonnes. By mid-2008, the country produced about 1.3 million short tonnes of coal annually and consumed about 1.5 million short tonnes, making it a small net importer of coal.() The country plans to increase hard-coal production to 5 million tons in 2012 from 2 million tons in November 2008.(Iran Plans to Produce 250,000 Tons of Copper in Year to March. Bloomberg, November 28, 2008. Retrieved November 28, 2008.) Main steel mills are located in Isfahan and Khuzestan. Iran became self-sufficient in steel production in 2009.(Steel Self-sufficiency. Iran Daily, June 11, 2009. Retrieved July 23, 2010.) Aluminum and copper production are projected to hit 245,000 and 383,000 tons respectively by March 2009.(( Cement production reached 65 million tons in 2009, while Iran exports this item to 40 countries.(Iran: $30 Billion Dollar to be invested in industry. IRNA, November 15, 2008. Retrieved November 15, 2008.)(Iran exports cement to 40 countries. Tehran Times, February 8, 2010. Retrieved October 31, 2010.)Energy, gas, petroleum and petrochemicalsFile:Iran-electricity.gif|thumb|right|Iran plans to generate 23,000 MWh of electricity through nuclear technology by 2025 to meet its increasing demand for energy.(Iran and Nuclear Energy. IRVL.net. Retrieved July 26, 2010.)Iran possesses 10% of the worlds proven oil reserves and 15% of its gas reserves.(Iran (data). US Department of Energy (2011). Retrieved March 28, 2011.) Domestic oil and gas along with hydroelectric power facilities provide the country with power.( Energy wastage in Iran amounts to six or seven billion dollars per year,( whilst energy consumption is much higher than the international norm.( Iran recycles 28% of its used oil and gas, whereas some other countries reprocess up to 60%.(Energy Wastage In Iran Equals 67 Billion Dollars Per Year. IRNA, October 29, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008.) In 2008 Iran paid out $84 billion in subsidies for oil, gas and electricity.( It is the third largest consumer of natural gas in the world after United States and Russia.( In 2010 Iran completed its first nuclear power plant at Bushehr with Russian assistance.()Iran has been a major oil exporter since 1913. The countrys major oil fields lie in the central and southwestern parts of the western Zagros mountains. Oil is also found in northern Iran and in the offshore waters of the Persian Gulf. In 1978, Iran ranked as the worlds fourth largest oil producer, OPECs second largest oil producer and second largest oil exporter.(Irans Economy. Parstimes. Retrieved September 24, 2010.) Following the 1979 revolution the new government reduced daily oil production in accordance with its oil conservation policy. A further decline in production occurred as result of damage to oil facilities during the Iraq-Iran war. Oil production rose in the late 1980s as pipelines were repaired and newly discovered oil fields in the Persian Gulf exploited. By 2004, Irans annual oil production reached 1.4 billion barrels producing a net profit of $50 billion.(Barry Schweid (December 26, 2006): Iran oil industry founders. Press. Retrieved 12 February 2008.) Officials in Iran estimate that Irans annual oil and gas revenues could reach $250 billion by 2015 once current projects come on stream.(Iran eyes $250 billion annual revenue in 5 years. Mehr News Agency, December 22, 2010. Retrieved December 22, 2010.) Iran manufactures 6070% of its industrial equipment domestically, including refineries, oil tankers, drilling rigs, offshore platforms and exploration instruments.(Dehloran Refinery Under Construction. Iran Daily, November 9, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.)(Company Advances In Energy Capabilities. Iran Daily, April 29, 2007. Retrieved February 12, 2008.)(Iran Ready for Sudden Cut in Gas Supplies. News Agency, July 14, 2010. Retrieved July 26, 2010.)(Share of domestically made equipments on the rise. SHANA, July 18, 2010. Retrieved July 26, 2010.)Oil Products.jpg|right|thumb|Irans refining capacity (2007-2013 est.)Major refineries located at Abadan (site of the countrys first refinery), Kermanshah, and Tehran failed to meet domestic demand for gasoline in 2009. Irans refining industry requires $15 billion in investment over the period 20072012 to become self-sufficient and end imports.(Irans oil refining industry needs dlrs 15b investment: Oil Minister. IRNA, February 17, 2007. Retrieved October 16, 2008.) Pipelines move oil from the fields to the refineries and to such exporting ports as Abadan, Bandar-e Mashur, and Island. Since 1997, Irans state-owned oil and gas industry has entered into major exploration and production agreements with foreign consortia.( postscript )() In 2008 the Oil Bourse (IOB) was inaugurated in Island.(1st phase of Iran oil stock inaugurated on Kish Island. IRNA, February 17, 2008. Retrieved 17 February 2008.) The IOB is intended as an oil bourse for petroleum, petrochemicals and gas in various currencies. Trading is primarily in the euro and rial along with a basket of other major currencies, excluding the US dollar.(Oil bourse opens in Irans Kish Island. PressTV, February 17, 2008. Retrieved February 17, 2008.) Thanks to a fertilizer plant in Shiraz, the largest ethylene unit in the world, in Asalouyeh, and the completion of many other special economic zone projects, Irans exports in petrochemicals reached $5.5 billion in 2007, $9 billion in 2008 and $7.6 billion during the first ten months of the Iranian calendar year 2010.(Iran opens world largest ethylene unit. PressTV, December 7, 2008. Retrieved June 5, 2009.)(Iran exports $570M of petrochemicals. PressTV, April 26, 2008. Retrieved June 5, 2009.)(Petrochemical Exports Pass $7 Billion. SHANA, January 31, 2011. Retrieved March 23, 2011.) According to Irans Petroleum Ministry, Iran plans to invest $500 billion in its oil sector until 2025.(Domestic Economy. Iran Daily, April 24, 2008. Retrieved March 23, 2011.)ServicesDespite efforts in the 1990s towards economic liberalization, government spending, including expenditure by quasi-governmental foundations, remains high. Estimates of service sector spending in Iran are regularly more than two-fifths of the GDP, much of which is government-related, including military expenditures, government salaries, and social security disbursements.(Urbanization has contributed to significant growth in the service sector. Important service industries include public services (including education), commerce, personal services, professional services, and tourism. Irans national science budget in 2005 was about $900 million, roughly equivalent to the 1990 figure.(Science in Iran: An Islamic Science Revolution?. Science Magazine, September 16, 2005 (subscription required). Retrieved November 15, 2008.) By early 2000, Iran allocated around 0.4% of its GDP to research and development, ranking the country far behind industrialized societies and the world average of 1.4%.(Reza Malekzadeh, Azarakhsh Mokri, Pejman Azarmina: Medical Science and Research in Iran. Academy of Medical Sciences of Iran. Retrieved December 4, 2008.)The total value of transport and communications GDP is expected to rise to $46 billion in nominal terms by 2013, representing 6.8% of Irans GDP.(Rail-Freight Transport. Iran Daily June 18, 2009. Retrieved February 4, 2011.) Projections based on employment figures compiled for the International Labor Organization in 1996 suggest that Irans transport and communications sector employed 3.4 million people, or 20.5% of the labor force in 2008.(Retail and distributionIrans retail industry consists largely of cooperatives (many of them government-sponsored), and independent retailers operating in bazaars. The bulk of food sales occur at street markets with prices set by the Chief Statistics Bureau. Iran has 438,478 small grocery retailers.( These are especially popular in cities other than Tehran where the number of hypermarkets and supermarkets is still very limited. More mini-markets and supermarkets are emerging, but these are mostly one-off, independently owned operations. The biggest chainstores are state-owned Etka, Refah, Shahrvand and Hyperstar Market.() Electronic commerce in Iran passed the $1 billion mark in 2009.(Irans e-commerce to reach rls 10,000 billion. IRNA, December 3, 2008. Retrieved March 22, 2011.)Healthcare and pharmaThe constitution entitles Iranians to basic care. By 2008, 73% of all Iranians were covered by the voluntary national health insurance system.() Although over 85% of the population use an insurance system to reimburse their drug expenses, the government heavily subsidizes pharmaceutical production/importation in order to increase affordability of medicines and vaccines. The total market value of Irans health and medical sector was $24 billion in 2002 and was forecast to rise to $50 billion by 2013, reflecting the increasing demand on medical services.(Health Sector in Iran. Australian Trade (2006). Retrieved February 12, 2008.)(Iran Pharmaceuticals and Healthcare Report. Business Monitor International (Q2 2009). Retrieved March 24, 2010.) In 2006, 55 pharmaceutical companies in Iran produced 96% (quantitatively) of the medicines for a market worth $1.2 billion.()(Health services and pharmaceuticals to Iran. Australian Trade (2006). Retrieved February 12, 2008.)(18% of Medicines Thrown Out Annually. Iran Daily, July 1, 2007. Retrieved February 12, 2008.) This figure is projected to increase to $3.65 billion by 2013.(Tourism and travelFile:Mount Damavand and birds.jpg|thumb|150px|Damavand is a tourist attraction. Iran currently ranks 68th in tourism revenues worldwide.Although tourism declined significantly during the war with Iraq in the 1980s it has subsequently recovered. About 1,659,000 foreign tourists visited Iran in 2004 and 2.3 million in 2009 with most arrivals from Asian countries, including the republics of Asia, while a small percentage of tourists (about 10%) came from the countries of the European Union and North America.()()(Iran hosted 2.3 million tourists this year. PressTV, March 19, 2010. Retrieved March 22, 2011.) The most popular tourist destinations are Isfahan, Mashhad, and Shiraz.(Sightseeing and excursions in Iran. Tehran Times, September 28, 2010. Retrieved March 22, 2011.) In the early 2000s the industry still faced serious limitations in infrastructure, communications, industry standards, and personnel training.( The majority of the 300,000 visas granted in 2003 were obtained by Asian Muslims, who presumably intended to visit important pilgrimage sites in Mashhad and Qom.( Several organized tours from Germany, France, and other European countries come to Iran annually to visit archaeological sites and monuments. In 2003 Iran ranked 68th in tourism revenues worldwide.(Iran ranks 68th in tourism revenues worldwide. Payvand/IRNA, Seppetember 7, 2003. Retrieved February 12, 2008.) According to the deputy head of research for Iran Travel and Tourism Organization (ITTO), Iran is rated among the 10 most touristic countries in the world.(Banking, finance and insuranceGovernment loans and credits are available to industrial and agricultural projects, primarily through banks. Irans unit of currency is the rial which had an average official exchange rate of 9,326 rials to the U.S. dollar in 2007.( Rials are also exchanged on the unofficial market at a higher rate. In 1979, the government nationalized all private banks. A banking system was subsequently created where, in accordance with Islamic law, interest on loans was replaced with handling fees. This system went into effect in the mid-1980s.( In 2008 Iranian reserves in foreign banks reached $81 billion.(Irans reserves in foreign banks increases 36% to $81B. Mehr News Agency, May 12, 2008. Retrieved May 12, 2008.) File:TEPIX.PNG|thumb|left|The Stock Exchange has been one of the worlds best performing stock exchanges in recent years.(Iran blocks share price gains. BBC, August 6, 2003. Retrieved February 15, 2010.)()The banking system consists of a central bank, the Markazi, which issues currency and oversees all state and private banks. Several commercial banks headquartered in Tehran have branches throughout the country. There are also two development banks and a housing bank that specializes in home mortgages. The government began to privatize the banking sector in 2001 when licenses were issued to two new privately owned banks.() The accounts of the state-owned commercial banks are dominated by loans to the state, bonyad enterprises, large-scale private firms and four thousand wealthy or connected individuals who do not always repay their loans.(Banking System Needs Overhaul. Iran Daily, October 7, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.)(President in Birjand Rally. Iran Daily October 9, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.) While most Iranians have difficulties obtaining small home loans, 90 persons have managed to secure collective facilities totaling $8 billion from banks.(In Iran, 90 people owe $8 billion to banks. PressTV, August 23, 2009. Retrieved April 3, 2011.) In 2009, GIO informed that Iranian banks have some $38 billion of delinquent loans, while they are only capitalized at $20 billion.(USD 38 billion delinquent loans to Iranian banks. PressTV, October 9, 2009. Retrieved April 23, 2011.) As of 2010, the Stock Exchange trades the shares of more than 330 registered companies.(  The stock market capitalization of listed companies in Iran was valued at $100 billion in 2011.(TSE ranked as best bourse index. PressTV, February 1, 2011. Retrieved February 1, 2011) According to experts, Iran offers many investment opportunities, particularly on its Tehran Stock Exchange.(Vast Economic Potential Lauded. Iran Daily, October 9, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.) In 2010, Iran attracted almost $11.9 billion from abroad, of which $3.6 billion was FDI, $7.4 billion was from international commercial bank loans, and around $900 million consisted of loans and projects from international development banks.(http://www.turquoisepartners.com/iraninvestment/IIM-Aug11.pdf)Insurance premiums accounted for just under 1% of GDP in 2008,( a figure partly attributable to low average income per head.( Five state-owned insurance firms dominate the market, four of which are active in commercial insurance. The leading player is the Iran Insurance Company, followed by Asia, Alborz and Dana insurances. In 2001/02 third-party liability insurance accounted for 46% of premiums, followed by health insurance (13%), fire insurance (10%) and life insurance (9.9%).(Communications and ITBroadcast media, including five national radio stations and five national television networks as well as dozens of local radio and television stations are run by the government. In 2008 there were 345 telephone lines and 106 personal computers for every 1,000 residents.( Personal computers for home use became more affordable in the mid-1990s, since when demand for Internet access has increased rapidly. As of 2010, Iran also had the worlds third largest number of bloggers (2010).(Hackers take Irans civil war online. Jerusalem Post, February 6, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2011) In 1998 the Ministry of Post, Telegraph & Telephone (later renamed the Ministry of Information & Communication Technology) began selling Internet accounts to the general public. In 2006, revenues from the Iranian telecom industry were estimated at $1.2 billion.(Privatization of Telecom Companies. Iran Daily, October 9, 2006. Retrieved February 12, 2008.) In 2006 Iran had 1,223 Internet Service Providers (ISPs), all private sector operated.(Information and communications technology to Iran. Australian Trade (2006). Retrieved May 9, 2009.)According to the Bank, Irans information and communications technology sector had a 1.4% share of GDP in 2008.(ICT At-a-Glance, Irans entry. World Bank. Retrieved February 4, 2011) Around 150,000 people are employed in this sector, including 20,000 in the software industry.(Iran. Economist Intelligence Unit (2006). Retrieved December 5, 2008.) There were 1,200 registered IT companies in 2002, 200 of which were involved in software development. In 2008 software exports stood at $50 million.(Software Exports Hit $45m. Iran Daily, November 2, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.) By the end of 2009, Irans telecom market was the fourth-largest market in the Middle East at $9.2 billion and is expected to grow to $12.9 billion by 2014 at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 6.9%.(Susan J. Campbell, Dearbhla McHenry (January 22, 2010): Iran Telecom Market Expected to Reach $12.9 Billion by 2014. TMCnet/Pyramid Research. Retrieved January 24, 2010.)TransportFile:Tehran metroStation.jpg|thumb|right|Tehran is the hub of the countrys communication and transport network.Iran has an extensive paved road system linking most of its towns and all of its cities. In 2007 the country had  of roads, of which 66% were paved. The same year there were approximately 100 passenger cars for every 1,000 inhabitants( whilst trains operated on  of track.(The countrys major port of entry is Bandar-Abbas on the of Hormuz. After arriving in Iran, imported goods are distributed throughout the country by trucks and freight trains. The TehranBandar-Abbas railroad, opened in 1995, connects Bandar-Abbas to the railroad system of Central Asia via Tehran and Mashhad. Other major ports include Anzali and Torkaman on the Caspian Sea and Khoramshahr and Bandar Imam Khomeini on the Gulf. Dozens of cities have airports serving passenger and cargo planes. Air, the national airline, was founded in 1962 and operates domestic and international flights. All large cities have mass transit systems using buses whilst several private companies provide bus services between cities. Tehran, Mashhad, Shiraz, Tabriz, Ahvaz and Isfahan are in the process of constructing underground railways. More than one million people work in the transportation sector, accounting for 9% of 2008 GDP.(Road Construction Projects Upbeat. Iran Daily, December 21, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.)Foreign trade and economic relationsFile:2006Iranian exports.PNG|thumb|200px|left|Iranian exports in 2006. Pistachios, liquefied propane, methanol, hand-woven carpets and automobiles are the core items of Irans non-oil exports.Iran is a founding member of OPEC and the Organization of Gas Exporting Countries.(Iran to Join Gas Exporters Club Soon. Fars News Agency, January 17, 2010. Retrieved January 22, 2010.) Petroleum constitutes 80% of Irans exports with a value of $46.9 billion in 2006.(Background about Irans economy. US Department of Energy (2011). Retrieved 23 January 2008.) Irans non-oil exports stood at $16.3 billion in 2007, a rise of 47.2% over the previous year,(Irans non-oil export up to dlrs 16.3b. IRNA, April 15, 2007. Retrieved January 23, 2008.) and $25 billion in 2010.(Irans non-oil exports stand at $21.321bn. PressTV, April 7, 2010. Retrieved April 7, 2010.)(Irans export value hits USD 25bn. PressTV, October 31, 2010. Retrieved October 31, 2010.) Pistachios, liquefied propane, methanol (methyl alcohol), hand-woven carpets and automobiles are the core items of Irans non-oil exports.(Iran to launch more trade counselors. PressTV, October 25, 2008. Retrieved October 25, 2008.) Irans exports of technical and engineering services in 200708 were $2.7 billion of which 40% of technical services pertained to Central Asia and the Caucasus, 30% ($350 million) to Iraq, and close to 20% ($205 million) to Africa.(Engineering Service Exports Improve. Iran Daily November 24, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.)Iranian firms have implemented projects in different fields such as energy, pipelines, irrigation, dam construction and power generation in different countries.() The country has made the development of non-oil exports a priority( and has the advantage of a broad domestic industrial base, an educated and motivated workforce as well as a favorable location, which gives it access to an estimated population of some 300 million people in Caspian markets, Persian Gulf states and some ECO countries further east.(An Overview of the Economy of the Islamic Republic of Iran. United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). Retrieved September 24, 2010.)(Statistics. Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) Secretariat.  Retrieved September 28, 2010.)The total volume of imports to Iran rose by 189% from $13.7 billion in 2000 to $39.7 billion in 2005.(Nader Habibi (May 5, 2005): The Cost of Economic Sanctions on Major Exporters to Iran. Payvand. Retrieved 23 January 2008.) and $55.189 billion in 2009.( Iran is among the few countries that has maintained positive GDP growth despite the 2008 global financial crisis.( Irans major commercial partners are China, India, Germany, South Korea, Japan, France, Russia and Italy. From 1950 until 1978, the United States was Irans foremost economic and military partner, playing a major role in the modernization of its infrastructure and industry.(Irans Industrial Progresses (Part I). Iran National Film Centre (circa 1975). Retrieved January 20, 2010.)(Irans Industrial Progresses (Part II). Iran National Film Centre (circa 1975). Retrieved January 20, 2010.)File:Economic Cooperation Organization map.svg|thumb|200px|Map of the Cooperation Organization (ECO) member statesSince the mid 90s, Iran has increased its economic cooperation with other developing countries in south-south integration including Syria, India, China, South Africa, Cuba and Venezuela. Irans trade with India passed the $13 billion mark in 2007, an 80% increase in trade volume within a year.($13bn: new record in Iran-India trade. PressTV, November 1, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008.) Iran is expanding its trade ties with Turkey and Pakistan and shares with its partners the common objective to create the ECO, a single economic market in West and Central Asia.(Iran pres. to attend ECO summit. PressTV, December 15, 2010. Retrieved February 3, 2011.)Since 2003, Iran has increased investment in the economic development and reconstruction of neighboring countries such as Iraq and Afghanistan. In Dubai, UAE, it is estimated that Iranian expatriates handle over 20% of its domestic economy and account for an equal proportion of its population.(Domestic Economy (Islamic WTO proposed). Iran Daily, January 22, 2006. Retrieved 23 January 2008.)(In 2005: Import Bill From Dubai $28.7b. Iran Daily, April 4, 2006. Retrieved 23 January 2008.) Migrant Iranian workers abroad remitted less than $2 billion home in 2006.(Overseas Workers Remit Over $2b. Iran Daily, October 22, 2007. Retrieved February 12, 2008.) Between 2005 and 2009, trade between Dubai and Iran tripled to $12 billion; money invested in the local real estate market and import-export businesses, collectively known as the Bazaar, and geared towards providing Iran and other countries with required consumer goods.(Kambiz Foroohar (January 25, 2010):  Dubai Helps Iran Evade Sanctions as Smugglers Ignore U.S. Laws. Bloomberg. Retrieved January 26, 2010.) It is estimated that one third of Irans imported goods and exports are delivered through the market, underground economy, and illegal jetties.(Wehrey, Frederic (2009): The Rise of the Pasdaran. Corporation. Retrieved June 10, 2010.)Foreign direct investmentIn the 1990s and early 2000s, some indirect oilfield development agreements were made with foreign firms, including buyback contracts in the oil sector whereby the contractor provided project finance then received remuneration from the Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) in the form of an allocated production share. Operation of the field was then transferred to NIOC after a set number of years, thereby completing the contract.(Iran - Oil and gas. Atieh Bahar Consulting (2003). Retrieved February 3, 2011.)Unfavorable or complex operating requirements and international sanctions have hindered foreign investment in the country, despite liberalization of relevant regulations by the Iranian government in the early 2000s. Iran absorbed $24.3 billion of foreign investment between the calendar years 1993 and 2007.(Iran attracted $24.3 billion foreign capital in 16 years. Mehr News Agency, May 27, 2007. Retrieved January 23, 2008.) Foreign direct investment in Iran hit a record $10.2 billion in 2007 from $4.2 billion in 2005 and $2 million in 1994.(Foreign Investment At Record Level. Iran Daily, April 10, 2007. Retrieved 23 January 2008.) Foreign transactions with Iran amounted to $150 billion of major contracts between 2000 and 2007, including private and government lines of credit.(Global Investment in Iran. American Enterprise Institute (2007). Retrieved 23 January 2008.) In 2007, Iran had $62 billion worth of assets abroad.(Irans foreign assets surpass $62b. Mehr News Agency, June 30, 2007. Retrieved 23 January 2008.) The EIU estimates that Irans net FDI will rise by 100% between 20102014.(The tragicomedy of Iran sanctions. Aljazeera, May 22, 2010. Retrieved May 22, 2010.) Foreign investors have concentrated their activities in the energy, vehicle manufacture, copper mining, construction, utilities, petrochemicals, clothing, food and beverages, telecom and pharmaceuticals sectors. Iran is a member of the World Banks Investment Guarantee Agency.() In 2006, the combined net worth of Iranian citizens abroad was about 1.3 trillion dollars.(Expats Worth $1.3 Trillion. Iran Daily, February 14, 2007. Retrieved 23 January 2008.)According to the head of the Organization for Investment, Economic and Technical Assistance of Iran (OIETAI), Iran ranked 142 among 181 countries in terms of working conditions in 2008. Iran stands at number 96 in terms of business start-up, 165 in obtaining permits, 147 in employment, 147 in asset registration, 84 in obtaining credit, 164 in legal support for investments, 104 in tax payments, 142 in overseas trade, 56 in contract feasibility and 107 in bankruptcy.(Working Conditions to Improve. Iran Daily, November 9, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.) Iran ranks 62nd in the Economic Forums  2011 analysis of  the global competitiveness of 142 countries.(Iran ranks 69th out of 139 in global competitiveness. Competitiveness Report, Economic Forum (2010). Retrieved September 18, 2010.)(Irans competitiveness rank up 7 places: WEF. Tehran Times, August 9, 2011 .Retrieved September 18, 2010.)Firms from over 50 countries invested in Iran between 19922008, with Asia and Europe the largest participants as shown below:($34b Foreign Investment in 16 years. Iran Daily, December 7, 2008. Retrieved July 23, 2010.)Iran and the World Trade OrganizationFile:Middle East Economy.jpg|thumb|right|The Middle East market is a prime opportunity for Irans non-oil exports.Iran has held observer status at the Trade Organization (WTO) since 2005. Although the United States has consistently blocked Irans bid to join the WTO since it first asked for membership, the country was accepted in a goodwill gesture to ease nuclear negotiations between Iran and the international community.(WTO Membership. Iran Daily, April 15, 2007. Retrieved 23 January 2008.)Should Iran eventually gain membership status in the WTO, among other prerequisites, copyright laws will have to be enforced in the country. This will require a major overhaul of business and trade operations. The country is hoping to attract billions of dollars worth of foreign investment whilst creating a more favorable investment climate through reduced restrictions and duties on imports. Creation of trade zones such as Qeshm, Chabahar and Island should also assist in this process. Iran has allocated $20 billion in 2010 to loans for the launch of twenty trade centers in other countries.(Iran Plans to Open Trade Centers Abroad. Fars News Agency, January 16, 2010. Retrieved January 18, 2010.)International sanctionsAfter the Revolution in 1979, the United States ended its economic and diplomatic ties with Iran, banned Iranian oil imports and froze approximately $11 billion of its assets.(Suzanne Maloney (2010): The Revolutionary Economy. United States Institute of Peace. Retrieved November 17, 2010.) In 1996, the Government passed the and Libya Sanctions Act (ILSA) which prohibits U.S. (and non-U.S. companies) from investing and trading with Iran in amounts of than $20 million annually.(Kenneth Katzman (2003): The Iran-Libya Sanctions Act (ILSA). CRS Report for Congress. Retrieved 23 January 2008.) Since 2000 exceptions to this restriction have been made for items including pharmaceuticals and medical equipment.(U.S. Approved Business With Blacklisted Nations. New York Times, December 23, 2010. Retrieved February 2, 2011.)Nuclear Program has been the subject of contention with the West since 2006 over suspicions of Irans military intentions. This has led the Security Council to impose sanctions against select companies linked to the nuclear program, thus furthering the countrys economic isolation on the international scene.( Sanctions notably bar nuclear, missile and many military exports to Iran and target investments in oil, gas and petrochemicals, exports of refined petroleum products, as well as the Revolutionary Guard Corps, banks, insurance, financial transactions and shipping.(Iran nuclear talks back on, in Geneva next week. Agence France Presse (AFP), November 30, 2010. Retrieved December 2, 2010.)See also*Donya-e-Eqtesad  leading Iranian business newspaper*superpower*Foreign relations of Iran  bilateral info on trade (by country)*of Iran  with links to ministries and affiliated agencies*Association of Iranian Managers*Irans international rankings in economy*Chamber of Commerce Industries and Mines*Calendar*Iranian economists*targeted subsidy plan*of Iranian companies*of Iranian people by net worth*of major economic laws in Iran*of Economic Affairs and Finance (Iran)*Eleven  list of countries having a high potential of becoming the worlds largest economies in the 21st century*Institute  Irans Davos Forum*Smuggling in Iran*in Iran*economyNotesReferences;Books********;Papers********;Government publications****;News* ;Articles* * * * * * ;Videos********External links; Publications and statistics* The World Factbook: Irans entry  States Central Intelligence Agency* The Economist: Iran  Forecast, factsheet, economic data & structure (Login required for Intelligence Unit reports)* Statistical Center of Iran  Database & index of publications*World Bank Statistics   Social and economic indicators for Iran* Global Investment in Iran  Enterprise Institute (List of major international companies investing in Iran broken down by their nationality, sector of activity and amount invested)* Turquoise Partners  Iran Investment Monthly (Reports on the Stock Exchange and Irans economy); Government websites* Central Bank of Iran (Including detailed statistics about Irans economy and sectors)* Trade Promotion Organization of Iran  Many useful information about trade, FDI, economic reports, customs, laws, statistics, links and opportunities for investors in Iran (Affiliated to Irans Ministry of Commerce)* US Department of Energy: Irans entry  Oil, gas, electricity, data, profile, analysis, weblinks/resources* Australian Government  Doing Business in Iran and Iran Profile  Many practical information and sector specific reports, with useful websites and resources (Login required for sector reports)* High Council of Iran Free Trade-Industrial Zone  Official site with information on Irans Free Trade Zones;General* Iran in Maps  BBC (Population, land, infrastructure)* Pars Times  Iran Business Resources  Comprehensive list of resources on the Internet relating to Iran and its economy**  etiquette and tourism information on IrandIrande:Iran#Wirtschaftde Irnde lIrando IrnIranadi IranIranja:dIrando IroIranaekonomisit Iranzh:
65434
Sin_City
Sin City is the title for a series of neo-noir comics by Frank Miller. The first story originally appeared in Dark Horse Presents Fifth Anniversary Special (April, 1991), and continued in Horse Presents #5162 from May 1991 to June 1992, under the title of Sin City, serialized in thirteen parts.  Several other stories of variable lengths have followed.  All stories take place in Basin City, with frequent recurring characters and intertwining stories.A movie adaptation of Sin City, co-directed by Rodriguez and Frank Miller with special guest director Tarantino, was released on April 1, 2005.  A planned sequel was announced soon after, but has since been delayed indefinitely.SettingBasin City, almost universally referred to by the nickname Sin City, is a fictional town in the American west.  The climate is hot and arid, although Sacred Oaks is characterized as being heavily wooded.  A major river runs through the city, which has an extensive waterfront.  Usually twice a year, a major downpour comes, and (in That Yellow Bastard) the city gets heavy snowfall in the winter.  In the comics, Basin City has a surreal, Pan-American feel.  Desert lizards and palm trees are common, while tar pits, desert areas, mountain ranges and flat farmland make up the landscape around the city.The Basin City Police are more or less along the lines of paramilitary or SWAT, as they have to deal with incredibly high crime rates among criminals and civilians alike, which is why they have access to what most would consider heavy weaponry and full body armor.  Those who make up the force have been described as commonly being lazy, cowardly and/or corrupt.  Only a handful of the cops are honest, though frequently the wealthy of the city bribe the corrupt members of the police into performing their duty (usually as a result of some crime being committed (or threatened)  against a member of their family).During the Gold Rush, the family imported a large number of attractive women to keep the miners happy, making a fortune and turning a struggling mining camp into a thriving, bustling city.  Over the years, as the Roark family migrated into other areas of business and power, these women ended up forming the district of Old Town, the prostitute quarter of the city where they rule with absolute authority.  In addition, the people charged with governing the city, most of them from the Roark line, remained in power for generations, running it as they saw fit.As the various yarns progress, the audience gradually becomes familiar with key locations in and around Basin City.*The Projects, the run-down and poor side of Sin City, is a tangle of high-rise apartments where crime runs rampant.  Its inhabitants have apparently evolved their own independent society with almost no legal contact with the outside world.  Marv was born in the Projects and they make Dwight sick.*The Docks, a collection of wharfs and warehouses that are local to the Projects.  Hartigan and Roark Junior have their first confrontation here in That Yellow Bastard, and Marv drives a stolen police car off one of the piers at the beginning of The Hard Goodbye.*Kadies Club Pecos, a strip club/bar where Nancy Callahan and Shellie work, and Dwight McCarthy and Marv hang out.  Though filled almost solely with drunk and violent men, Kadies bar is one of the safest areas in Sin City.  Marv, who possesses an extraordinarily high sense of chivalry, protects the female employees of Kadies from any violence that makes its way inside.*Roark Family Farm (a.k.a. The Farm) is located at North Cross and Lennox and shows up in several stories, including The Hard Goodbye, That Yellow Bastard,  The Babe Wore Red and Hell and Back.  It was also home to Kevin, a killer with ties to the Roark family.  Marv burns down one of the buildings, and the Farm is abandoned sometime after the initial Sin City storyline.*Old Town is the district and is off limits to the police, unless theyre shopping.  This is where the citys population of prostitutes reside; it recently came under the control of the twins Goldie and Wendy.  Though perfectly willing to engage in almost any sexual act for the right price, the women of Old Town show no mercy to those who break the rules and back up their independence with lethal force.  The mob and pimps were thrown out after a period of fighting.*Sacred Oaks, home to the rich and powerful of Basin City.  This suburb lies beyond the city proper, a half an hour drive uphill.  A university of some sort is also located there, and the entire area is patrolled by armed employees of its wealthy inhabitants.*Basin City Central Train Station, which has a direct connection to Phoenix.*The Santa Yolanda Tar Pits, an abandoned amusement park of sorts outside the city, where several pits are located and dinosaur bones were excavated at some time.  After a big-budget dinosaur movie (presumably a reference to Jurassic Park) caused a sensation, the county put up concrete statues of dinosaurs there to draw crowds.  However, after an old lady fell through a railing into one of the pits and had a heart attack, the place was shut down indefinitely.  They are frequently used as a place to dump things that people dont want found; high-schoolers also tend to sneak in there a lot.  This is where Delia tells Phil to drive in Wrong Turn and where Dwight takes the corpses of Jackie Boy and his friends in The Big Fat Kill.  Frank Miller has admitted the main reason the Tar Pits exist is as an excuse to draw the dinosaur statues.CharactersIndividuals*Marv*McCarthy*Callahan*Gail*Miho*Hartigan*Wallace*Junior (aka. The Yellow Bastard)OrganizationsBecause a large majority of the residents of Basin City are criminals, there are several organizations and cartels central to the stories who are vying for monopoly over the various criminal enterprises in the city.  Listed below are crime syndicates, gangs and other low-lifes who figure heavily in the Sin City mythos.;The Basin City Police Department: So deep do corruption and criminality run in Basin City that even their police officers qualify as a gang of paid thugs, turning a blind eye to the affairs of those too poor to pay them off.  Few among them are considered incorruptible; even the honest officers are unable (or unwilling) to curtail the criminal actions of the dishonest ones.  Notable characters in the series who are police include Detective Hartigan, his partner Bob, Lieutenants Rafferty and Mort, Commissioner Liebowitz, and Officers Manson and Bundy from Hell and Back.;The family: A dynasty of corrupt landowners and politicians whose influence over Basin City has stretched as far back as the days of the Old West.  Famous Roarks of this generation include a senator, a cardinal, an attorney general, and Roark Junior, That Yellow Bastard.;Girls of Old Town: Populating the region of Basin City known as Old Town are a group of women in the worlds oldest profession, having made a truce with the cops to allow them to govern and police themselves.  As of A Dame To Kill For, they were led by the twins, Goldie and Wendy.;Organization: A powerful crime syndicate led by Herr Wallenquist, a mysterious crime lord with a broad range of criminal enterprises to his name.  Interestingly, though one of the citys two normal criminal organizations, the Wallenquist management seems to be the most peaceful and forgiving of the various leaders.;The Crime Family: The undisputed heads of the local Nostra, the Magliozzi family seems to be the purest example of true Mafia lifestyle.  While they appear in only one story, it is hinted that the Mafia influence in Basin Citys underworld is a lot larger than just their family.Other groups that have been seen or mentioned in the comics include:;Tong gangsters: Mentioned, but not seen as of A Dame To Kill For.  Mihos life was saved by Dwight when he secretly protected her during a fight with several Tong gangsters in a dark alleyway.;White slavers: Mentioned, but not seen as of A Dame To Kill For.  Led by a man named Manuel, whose brothers were also involved.  Were taken care of by Dwight prior to the events of A Dame To Kill For.;Irish mercenaries: Seen during The Big Fat Kill, most of them are evidently former I.R.A. members, as implied by one of the mercenaries referring to his glee at blowing up a house (British pubs were targeted by the I.R.A.).  All are killed by Dwight and Miho.Sin City yarnsThese are the individual stories, usually referred to as yarns, set in Frank Millers Sin City universe.  For more info see of Sin City yarns.Collected editionsThe stories have been collected into trade paperbacks and hardcover Library Editions. The hardcovers include two releases, which include Volume 1 (Books 1-4) and 2 (Books 5-7 and The Art of).TPBThere is also a collection of art, The Art of Sin City.ChronologyWhile it was the first story written, The Hard Goodbye was not the first story chronologically, with the first section of That Yellow Bastard as the first.  The Dwight-related stories fall in between these, with the short stories fleshing out the time between the main stories.  Here is a rough chronology of the Yarns:*The first section of That Yellow Bastard, wherein Detective John Hartigan rescues Nancy Callahan from Roark Jr., resulting in Hartigan and Junior winding up in the hospital, occurs at least twelve years before the events of The Hard Goodbye.  After being gunned down by his partner, Bob, Hartigan is framed as a child molester and charged with raping Nancy Callahan.  He is placed into solitary confinement for eight years. Liebowitz beats Hartigan, trying to gain a confession. Mort is seen briefly in the hospital, where he tries to convince Hartigan to defend himself. *Ava leaves Dwight and marries Damien Lord some time during this, referred to in A Dame To Kill For.*Hartigan is put on parole, meeting up with Mort. finds the nineteen-year-old Nancy Callahan when he is out on parole.  It is also on this night that Dwight goes home with Shellie, and sleeps with her (he is seen whining to Shellie when Hartigan enters Kadies).  Marv witnesses the reunion of Nancy and Hartigan, as shown in the beginning of Just Another Saturday Night.*The remaining events of That Yellow Bastard play out within the next few hours or so.*About a year later, Dwight secretly saves Miho from Tong gangsters; revealing this saves him during A Dame to Kill For.*Three years later, the twins, Goldie and Wendy, take over Old Town.  A few weeks later, Ava Lord contacts Dwight and asks to meet him.  Ava mentions that it has been about four years since they last saw each other and Dwight agrees.  Manute interrupts their meeting.  Fearing for her safety, Dwight goes to Kadies and recruits the help of Marv.  Shellie lectures Dwight at having not seen nor heard from him in six months.*Marv and Dwight attack the home of Damien and Ava Lord. Marv fights Manute, and Manute loses his eye in the process.  After Damien is killed, Dwight is taken to Old Town by Marv, badly wounded.  Dwight begins to be rehabilitated at this point.*Gail, Dwight, Miho and Shellie develop a plan to get revenge on Ava Lord.  Gail and the others tell Shellie that Dwight is still alive, and brief her on what she should tell the cops.  On this same night, Delia (A.K.A. Blue Eyes) is inducted into the service of Wallenquist, placing her in league with the Colonel.  Marv is at the bar when Delia sweeps off with her prey, happily resuming his nocturnal drinking habits.  Manute is also briefly seen interacting with the Colonel, sporting a neck-brace.*One night, possibly the same one as Blue Eyes, Marv meets Goldie at Kadies.  The Hard Goodbye begins with Marv waking and finding Goldie dead.*In the beginning of Marvs rampage, he goes to Kadies to try and draw attention to himself.  On the same night, Mort and Bob arrive at Kadies (mere seconds after Marvs arrival) and interview Shellie about Dwights location following the murder of Damien Lord.  She tells them all that briefed her on in Blue Eyes and sends them on their way.*A few days into Marvs rampage, Bob (Hartigans former partner in That Yellow Bastard) is shot dead by his partner Mort, who takes his own life (A Dame to Kill For).*Less than three months later, Ava and Wallenquist unite their criminal empires.  Dwight McCarthy (with a new face), Miho, and Gail raid Ava Lords estate, with Manute being gravely injured by both Miho and Dwight.  Dwight kills Ava.*The Babe Wore Red occurs, and in the story, Dwight states that Marv is currently on death row, framed for the deaths of Goldie and several others from The Hard Goodbye.*Fat Man and Little Boy occurs, if we assume the witness they failed to silence is Mary, and that the two are concurrent.*Eighteen months after the beginning of The Hard Goodbye, Wendy visits Marv on death row.  A day later, he is executed by electric chair, dying on the second attempt as those pansies (as he insults them) didnt have enough juice on the first go.*Wrong Turn occurs and Delia kills the wrong target.  Delia, the Colonel and Gordo dispose of the dead men.  Wrong Turn features the first mention of Mariah, who makes her first appearance in Hell and Back.*Wrong Track occurs shortly after Wrong Turn, as Delia tries to kill the real target (on his way back from a delivery).*The Big Fat Kill occurs. On a hot summer night, shortly before a major thunderstorm, Miho slaughters Jackie Boy and his friends.  Dwight, in an attempt to prevent a mob war, tries to dispose of Jackie Boy.  The Old Town girl known as Becky betrays them to the mob (Wallenquist, represented through Manute) in an attempt to make money and get out of the prostitution game.  Manute, embittered by the death of Ava Lord, captures Gail and encourages a trade: Jackie Boys head for Gail.  Dwight and Miho arrange the trade, but the Old Town girls kill Becky and all of the other mob men.  Manute is finally killed during a shoot-out.  Wendy is also notably absent from this story, implying she was either still in hiding or otherwise preoccupied at the time, forcing Gail to take command of the girls.*Family Values takes place in winter after The Big Fat Kill, indicated by Dwight making reference to Mihos previous killing of a cop (The Big Fat Kill), as well as his acknowledgement of Fat Man and Little Boy, who he says he shot in the legs last time he saw them (The Babe Wore Red).*Behind Door Number Three... occurs at some point after Marvs capture, most likely after he was visited in prison by Wendy on the night of his execution; this is suggested by the fact she is seen wearing either Marvs crucifix neck-lace or one very similar, perhaps as a gift from him or as a way of honoring his sacrifice.*Wrong Turn and Wrong Track occur immediately after each other, because Delia is still after the same target.The short stories Rats, The Customer is Always Right, Daddys Little Girl, and Silent Night are the hardest to place in the chronology, as some of them do not contain any of the series regular characters, are not connected to the other stories, or do not give an idea of when the stories occur. Silent Night takes place sometime before The Hard Goodbye during the winter, as Marv is still quite alive and seen lumbering through one of Basin Citys rare snow-storms.  Robert Rodriguez stated that The Customer is Always Right occurs in between That Yellow Bastard and The Hard Goodbye on the Sin City: Recut and Extended DVD Edition. Silent Night also portrays Marv shooting a woman, suggesting that the story takes place before his vow not to fight women mentioned in A Dame to Kill For and The Hard Goodbye. Hell and Back does not fit into any particular time period. Manute is seen, alive with his false eye, suggesting that the events take place between A Dame to Kill For and The Big Fat Kill however, it is established that Hell and Back takes place over several cool nights in September; The Big Fat Kill took place on a hot summer night during a thunderstorm. Also, Dwight McCarthy is briefly shown driving the Cadillac he acquires in the winter following the conclusion of Family Values, which suggests that Hell and Back is the final major yarn in the Sin City Universe.AwardsSin City: The Big Fat Kill won the Buyers Guide Fan Award for Favorite Limited Series for 1996.  Sin City: Family Values won the 1997 Eisner Awards.* 1993:** Hard Goodbye won the Best Graphic Album: Reprint (Modern Material) Award()** Frank Miller won the Best Penciller/Inker, Black & White Publication Eisner Award, for The Hard Goodbye(** Frank Miller won the Best Writer/Artist Eisner Award, for The Hard Goodbye(* 1995:** Dame to Kill For won Best Limited Series Eisner Award()** The Babe Wore Red, won Best Short Story Eisner Award(*1996:** Big Fat Kill won the Best Limited Series Eisner Award()** Sin City won the Best Continuing or Limited Series Award()*1998:** Yellow Bastard won the Best Graphic Album-Reprint Eisner Award()** Family Values won the Best Graphic Album of Original Work Harvey Award()*2008:** Sin City won the Best Black & White Title Project Fanboy Award()StyleSin City is famous for its artwork, which draws heavily from noir, including its use of shadow and stark backgrounds. Black and white are the sole colors most of the time with exception of red, yellow, blue, and pink in some stories. Partial color usage is designed to draw attention to a certain character in the story.The writing style also draws heavily on detective and crime pulp fiction.  Strange metaphors and similes are often used.  This gives the narration a very pulpy feel.See also*City (film)ReferencesExternal links*Sin City at Dark Horse Comics*Frank Miller`s Sin City & 300 & Spirit - Database articles, images and other files about Frank Millers and his comics.*Sin City Introduction - Fan site containing detailed information about characters and locations*Sin City Timeline, from the personal website of a System game player*Sin City, from an ad-supported website devoted to the sophisticated study of comic books*Frank Miller: The Complete Works, The most comprehensive listing of all of Frank Millers works. Includes very detailed information on each book as well as a discussion forum.*IFILM explore Rats: A Sin City Yarn, The Short Story out of Lost, Lonely, & Lethal.*SuperheroHype! Sin City Messageboard, Forums dedicated to both the comics and film.*Sin City Effect Tutorial Achieve the Sin City Look in your videos with Sony Vegas (Video Tutorial). CityCityCity (Comic)CityCityCity (comics)City (fumetto)miestasCity (kpregnysorozat)City (serie)()CityCityCity (komiks)CityCityCityCityCityCity
66171
Stephen_F._Austin
thumb|Stephen F. Austin (by an unidentified artist)Stephen Fuller Austin (November 3, 1793 &ndash; December 27, 1836), known as the Father of Texas, led the second, but first legal and ultimately successful colonization of the region by bringing 300 families from the States. The capital of Texas, Austin in Travis County, Austin County, Bayou, F. Austin State University in Nacogdoches, College in Sherman, as well as a number of schools are named in his honor.Early yearsthumb|left|300px|Stephen F. Austin and FatherStephen F. Austin was born in the mining regions of southwestern Virginia (Wythe County), in what is now known as Austinville, some  west of Virginia.(Stephen Fuller Austin -Biography) He was the second child of Austin and Brown Austin, the first, Eliza Austin, having lived only one month. On June 8, 1798, when he was four years old, his family moved 40 miles west of the River to the lead mining region in present-day Potosi, Missouri. His father Moses Austin received a Sitio(Lonestar Text book) from the Spanish government for the mining site of Mine  Breton, established by French colonists.When Austin was eleven years old, his family sent him to be educated at Academy in Connecticut and then at University in Kentucky, from which he graduated in 1810.(Edmondson (2000), p. 59.)  After graduating, Austin began studying to be a lawyer; at age twenty-one he served in the legislature of the Territory. As a member of the territorial legislature, he was influential in obtaining a charter for the struggling Bank of St. Louis.(http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/AA/fau14.html)Austin was left penniless after the of 1819, and decided to move south to the new Territory.(  He acquired property on the south bank of the Arkansas River, in the area that would later become Little Rock.  After purchasing the property, he learned that the area was in consideration as the location for the new territorial capital, which could make his land worth a great deal more.(Edmondson (2000), p. 60.)He made his home in County, Arkansas, before moving to the Texas territories.  Two weeks before the first territorial elections in 1820, Austin declared his candidacy for Congress.  His late entrance meant that his name did not appear on the ballot in two of the five counties, but he still placed second in the field of six candidates.  He was later named a judge for the First Circuit Court.( Over the next few months, Little Rock did become the territorial capital, but Austins claim to land in the area was contested and the courts ruled against him.  The Territorial Assembly reorganized the government and abolished Austins judgeship.(  Austin then moved to Louisiana. He reached New Orleans in November 1820, where he met and stayed with New Orleans lawyer and former Kentucky congressman H. Hawkins and made arrangement to study law.Moving to TexasFile:The Alamo 1936 Issue-3c.jpg|thumb|right|250px|Sam Houston and Austinare depicted on the Texas Centennial Issue of 1936During Austins time in Arkansas, his father traveled to Texas and received an empresarial grant that would allow him to bring 300 American families to Texas (they would later become known as The Old 300).(  Moses Austin was attacked on his way back to Missouri.(  Upon returning home, Moses became ill with what was believed to be pneumonia and died on June 10, 1821.  He left his empresario grant to his son Stephen.  Though Austin was reluctant to carry on his fathers Texas venture, Austin was persuaded to pursue the colonization of Texas by a letter from his mother, Brown Austin, written just two days before Moses Austin died.(http://0-www.tshaonline.org.sapl.sat.lib.tx.us/handbook/online/articles/AA/fau11.html)Austin boarded the steamer Beaver and departed to New Orleans to meet Spanish officials led by Segun. He was at Louisiana, on June 31, 1821, when he learned of his fathers death. This news has effected me very much, he was one of the most feeling and affectionate Fathers that ever lived. His faults I now say, and always have, were not of the heart.(Letter from Stephen F. Austin to Maria Austin, July 13, 1821)His party traveled the  in three weeks to Antonio with the intent of reauthorizing his fathers grant, arriving on August 12.  While in transit, they learned that Mexico had declared its independence from Spain, and Texas had become a Mexican province rather than a Spanish territory.  A San Antonio native, Antonio Navarro, having like visions of the future of Texas befriended Stephen F. Austin, and a lasting association developed between the two.  Navarro, proficient with Spanish and Mexican law, would assist Austin in obtaining his empresario contracts.(Todish (1998), p. 107.) In San Antonio, the grant was reauthorized by Governor Mara Martnez, who allowed Austin to explore the Gulf Coast between Antonio and the River to find a suitable location for a colony.( As guides for the party, Becerra, along with three Aranama Indians, went with the expedition.Austin advertised the opportunity in Orleans, stating that the land was available along the Brazos and Colorado rivers.(Edmondson (2000), p. 61.)  A family of a husband, wife and two children would receive  at twelve and a half cents per acre. Farmers could get  and ranchers 4,428.  In December 1821, the first U.S. colonists crossed into the granted territory by land and sea, on the Brazos River in present-day County, Texas.Empresario Austinthumb|Stephen F. Austin was an important figure in early Texas.Austins plan for a colony was thrown into turmoil by the independence of Mexico from Spain in 1821. Governor Martnez informed Austin that the junta instituyente, the new rump congress of the government of de Iturbide of Mexico, refused to recognize the grant authorized by Spain, based on a new policy of using a general law to regulate new settlement in Mexico. Austin traveled to City and managed to persuade the junta instituyente to authorize the grant to his father, as well as the Law signed by the Spanish Emperor on January 3, 1823. The old Imperial Law offered heads of families a league and a labor of land, , and other inducements. It also provided for the employment of agents, called empresarios, to promote immigration. As empresario, Austin himself was to receive  of land for each two hundred families he introduced. According to the law, immigrants were not required to pay fees to the government. This fact soon led some of the immigrants to deny Austins right to charge them for services at the rate of 12 cents an acre ($31/km).When the Emperor of Mexico, de Iturbide, abdicated in March 1823, the law was annulled once again. In April 1823, Austin induced the congress to grant him a contract to bring 300 families into Texas. He wanted honest, hard-working, people who would make the colony a  success. In 1824 the congress passed a new immigration law that allowed the individual states of Mexico to administer public lands and open them to settlement under certain conditions. In March 1825, the legislature of the Mexican state of y Tejas passed a law similar to the one authorized by Iturbide. The law continued the system of empresarios, as well as granting each married man a league of land, , with the stipulation that he must pay the state thirty dollars within six years.By late 1825, Austin had brought the first 300 families to his settlement (The Austin Colony), now known in Texas history as the Three Hundred. Austin had obtained further contracts to settle an additional 900 families between 1825 and 1829. He had effective civil and military authority over the settlers, but he was quick to introduce a semblance of American law - the Constitution of Coahuila y Tejas was agreed on in November 1827.  Also, Austin organized small, informal armed groups to protect the colonists, which evolved into the Texas Rangers.  Despite his hopes, Austin was making little money from his endeavors; the colonists were unwilling to pay for his services as empresario and most of his revenues were spent on the processes of government and other public services.It was during these years that Austin, a member of Louisiana Lodge No. 111 at Genevieve, Missouri, sought to establish Freemasonry in Texas. Freemasonry was well established among the educated classes of Mexican society. It had been introduced among the aristocracy loyal to the of Bourbon, and the conservatives had total control over the Order. By 1827 Americans living in City had introduced the United States Rite of Freemasonry as a liberal alternative to the established European-style Rite.(Normand, Pete (1986). The Texas Masons: The Fraternity of Ancient Free & Accepted Masons in the History of Texas. College Station, TX: Brazos Valley Masonic Library & Museum Assn.) On February 11, 1828, Austin called a meeting of Freemasons at San Felipeto elect officers and petition the Masonic Lodge in Mexico City for a charter to form a lodge. Austin was elected Master of the new lodge. Although the petition reached Matamoros, and was to be forwarded to Mexico City, nothing more was heard of it. By 1828, the ruling faction in Mexico was afraid that the liberal elements in Texas might try to gain their independence. Fully aware of the political philosophies of American Freemasons, the government outlawed Freemasonry on October 25, 1828. In 1829, Austin called another meeting where it was decided that it was impolitic and imprudent, at this time, to form Masonic lodges in Texas.(Carter, Dr. James D. (1955). Masonry in Texas:  Background, History, and Influence to 1846. Waco, Texas:  Committee on Masonic Education and Service, Grand Lodge of Texas, A.F. & A.M.)He was active to promote trade and to secure the good favor of the Mexican authorities, aiding them in the suppression of the Fredonian Rebellion of Edwards. Some historians consider the Fredonian Rebellion to be the beginning of the Revolution.  Although premature ... Fredonian Rebellion sparked the powder for later success.(Bates (1956), p. 794.) For this case, Austin raised troops to fight with Mexican troops against the Texas rebels. With the colonists numbering over 11,000 by 1832, they were becoming less conducive to Austins cautious leadership, and the Mexican government was also becoming less cooperative. It was concerned with the growth of the colony and the efforts of the U.S. government to buy the state from them.  The Mexican government had attempted to stop further U.S. immigration as early as April 1830, but Austins skills gained an exemption for his colonies. He gave  to the husband, 320 to the wife, 160 for every child, and 80 for every slave.Relations with MexicoThe application of the immigration control and the introduction of tariff laws had done much to dissatisfy the colonists, peaking in the Disturbances. Austin then felt compelled to involve himself in Mexican politics, supporting the upstart Lpez de Santa Anna. Following the success of Santa Anna, the colonists sought a compensatory reward, proclaimed at the of 1832&mdash;resumption of immigration, tariff exemption, separation from Coahuila, and a new state government for Texas. Austin was not in favor of these demands, he considered them ill-timed and tried his hardest to moderate them. When they were repeated and extended at the of 1833, Austin traveled to City on July 18, 1833, and met with Vice President Gomez Faras. Austin did gain certain important reforms; the immigration ban was lifted, but not a separate state government. Separate statehood required a population of 80,000 before it could be granted, and Texas had only 30,000Texas RevolutionIn his absence, a number of events propelled the colonists toward confrontation with Santa Annas centralist government. Austin took temporary command of the Texan forces during the of Bexar from October 12 to December 11, 1835. After learning of the Disturbances at Anahuac and Velasco in the summer of 1835, an enraged Santa Anna made rapid preparations for the Mexican army to sweep Anglo settlers from Texas.  War began in October 1835 at Gonzales. The of Texas, created by a new constitution on March 2, 1836, won independence following a string of defeats with the dramatic turnabout victory at the of San Jacinto on April 21, 1836, and the capture of Santa Anna the following morning.Austin in the Republic of TexasIn December 1835 Austin, Branch Archer and H. Wharton were appointed commissioners to the U.S. by the provisional government of the republic.  On June 10, 1836, Austin was in New Orleans when he received word of Santa Annas defeat by Houston at San Jacinto.  Austin returned to Texas to rest at Peach Point in August.  On August 4, he announced his candidacy for president of Texas.  Austin felt confident he could win the election until with two weeks before the election, on August 20, Houston entered the race.  Austin wrote, Many of the old settlers who are too blind to see or understand their interest will vote for him. Houston carried East Texas, the Red River and most of the soldier vote.  Austin polled 587 votes to Houstons 5,119 and Smiths 743 votes.Houston would appoint Austin as the first Secretary of State of the new Republic; however, Austin  served only around 2 months before his tragic death.Death and EstateIn December 1836, Austin was in the new capital of Columbia (now known as West Columbia) where he caught a severe cold; his condition worsened. Doctors were called in, but could not help him.  Austin died of pneumonia at noon on December 27, 1836, at the home of George B. McKinstry right outside of what is now West Columbia, Texas. Austins last words were The independence of Texas is recognized! Dont you see it in the papers?... Upon hearing of Austins death, Houston ordered an official statement proclaiming: The Father of Texas is no more; the first pioneer of the wilderness has departed. Austin was originally buried at Prairie Cemetery in County, Texas.  Austins body was moved, however, in 1910 to the State Cemetery in Texas.Austin died without having produced offspring, and bequeathed all his land, titles, and possessions, to his sister, Austin Perry.MonumentsFile:Stephen F. Austin monument, Austin, TX IMG_2161.JPG|200px|right|thumb|Stephen F. Austin grave monument at State Cemetery in Austin, Texas* Texas is the home of College.(http://www.austincollege.edu/)* Texas is the home of F. Austin State University.(http://www.sfasu.edu)* Both Texas and County, Texas are named after Stephen F. Austin.  However, Austin (the city) is not located in Austin (the county).(http://www.co.travis.tx.us/)  (Austin, Texas is located in Travis County).(* Texas features a statue of Austin,(http://www.pbase.com/artichoke/image/53115716) sponsored by The Stephen F. Austin 500 sculpted by David Addicks, similar in height to the statue of Houston found in Texas.* The Statuary Hall Collection permits each state to select just two statues for display at the Capital in Washington, DC.  Texas selected Sam Houston and Stephen F. Austin; these statues were sculpted by German immigrant Ney.(http://www.texasbob.com/travel/tbt_washingtondc.html)*Prairie Cemetery, his original place of burial.(http://www.gulf-prairie.org/Areamuseums.htm)*In 1959, Austin was posthumously inducted into the of Great Westerners at the Cowboy Hall of Fame in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.Past familyWhile Stephen F. Austin and his sister Emily have each been subject of biography, they are descended from several generations of noteworthy people including: Austin (fatherbiography published by Trinity University Press),(Gracy, David B., Moses Austin: his life (Trinity University Press, 1987) ISBN 0-911536-84-1) Brown (grandfather), Sharp (great grandfather), Sharp (great, great grandfather), Anthony Sharp (great, great, great grandfatherbiography published by Stanford University Press).()  Accordingly, history records noteworthy social contribution in each generation of Stephens family dating back to the early 17th century.See also*Austin, his father*Brown Austin, his mother*Elijah Brown Austin, his brother*Austin Perry, his sister*Brown, his maternal grandfather*Mara Jess Carbajal Mentored by Austin*Sharp, great grandfather*Sharp, his great, great grandfather*Anthony Sharp, his great, great, great grandfather*Point Plantation, his residence*Creek, site of his residence*J. Pilgrim, his friend and Spanish interpreter*James Bryan, his brother-in-law (first husband to Emily)*Franklin Perry, his brother-in-law (second husband to Emily)NotesReferences***Further reading********External links* .* Ellis P. Bean, Stephen F. Austin, hosted by the Portal to Texas History.*Biography of Stephen F. Austin from The Biographical Encyclopedia of Texas, hosted by the Portal to Texas History.*   Austins Colonization Laws, 1822 from Gammels Laws of Texas, Vol. I. hosted by the Portal to Texas History.Fuller AustinF. AustinF. AustinFuller AustinFuller Austinja:F. AustinFuller Austin 
67030
Errol_Flynn
occupationActorErrol Leslie Flynn (20 June 1909 14 October 1959)( was an Australian actor.(Obituary Variety, 21 October 1959, page 87.) He was known for his romantic swashbuckler roles in Hollywood films and his flamboyant lifestyle.Early lifeErrol Flynn was born in Tasmania, where his father, Thomson Flynn, was a lecturer (1909) and later professor (1911) of biology at the of Tasmania (UTAS). Flynn was born at the Queen Alexandra Hospital in Battery Point. His mother was born Lily Mary Young, but dropped the first names Lily Mary shortly after she was married and changed her name to Marelle.(Flynn always calls her Marelle in his autobiography.) Flynn described his mothers family as seafaring folk(Flynn, My Wicked, Wicked Ways, p.33.) and this appears to be where his life-long interest in boats and the sea originated. Despite Flynns claims, the evidence indicates that he was not descended from any of the Bounty mutineers.()(Flynn, My Wicked, Wicked Ways, p.33. She was a descendant of Midshipman Edward (or Ned) Young.)  Married at St Johns Church of England, Balmain North, Sydney, on 23 January 1909,()() both of his parents were native-born Australians of Irish, English and Scottish descent, with convict links to Tasmania long before Flynns birth.((Flynn, My Wicked, Wicked Ways, p.25.) Flynn, living at Mclean Avenue Chatswood, Sydney in 1926, attended Church of England Grammar School (School)(Moore,John Hammond: Young Errol:Flynn before Hollywood, 1975. ISBN 0-207-13158-9) where he was the classmate of future Australian Prime Minister, Gorton.() He was expelled for fighting and, allegedly, having sex with a school laundress.(My Wicked, Wicked Ways (essay)) He was also expelled from several other schools he had attended in Tasmania. At the age of 20 he moved to Guinea where he bought a plantation, a business which failed. A mining venture in the hills near the Laloki Valley, behind the present national capital, Moresby, also failed.In the early 1930s, Flynn left for the United Kingdom and, in 1933, snagged an acting job with the Northampton repertory company at the towns Royal Theatre, where he worked for seven months. He also performed at the 1934 Malvern Festival and in Glasgow and Londons West End.()In 1933, he starred in the Australian film the Wake of the Bounty, directed by Charles Chauvel, and in 1934 appeared in at Monte Carlo, produced at the Bros. Studios, UK. This latter film is now considered a film.(http://www.bfi.org.uk/nationalarchive/news/mostwanted/murder-at-monte-carlo.html) During the filming of Murder at Monte Carlo, Flynn was discovered by a Brothers executive, signed to a contract and immigrated to America as a contract actor. He became a naturalised citizen of the United States in 1942, eight months after America entered World War II.Acting careerthumb|Flynn as Captain BloodFlynn was an overnight sensation in his first starring role, Captain Blood (1935). Quickly typecast as a swashbuckler, he followed it with The Charge of the Light Brigade (1936). After his appearance as Miles Hendon in The Prince and the Pauper (1937), he was cast in his most celebrated role as Robin Hood in The Adventures of Robin Hood (1938), his first film in Technicolor. He went on to appear in The Dawn Patrol (1938) with his close friend Niven, Dodge City (1939),  The Sea Hawk (1940) and of Don Juan (1948).Working throughout his career with a cross section of Hollywoods best fight arrangers, Flynn became noted for his fast-paced sword fights as seen in The Adventures of Robin Hood, The Sea Hawk and Captain Blood.()Flynn co-starred with de Havilland in eight films: Captain Blood (1935), The Charge of the Light Brigade (1936), The Adventures of Robin Hood (1938), a Crowd (1938), Dodge City (1939), Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex (1939), Santa Fe Trail (1940), and Died with Their Boots On (1941)While Flynn acknowledged his attraction to de Havilland, film historian Behlmers assertions that they were romantically involved during the filming of Robin Hood (see the Special Edition of Robin Hood on DVD, 2003) have been disputed by de Havilland. In an interview for Classic Movies, she said that their relationship was platonic, mostly because Flynn was already married to Damita.During the shooting of Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex (1939), Flynn and co-star Davis quarrelled off-screen, causing Davis to allegedly strike him harder than necessary while filming a scene. Although their relationship was always strained, Bros. co-starred them twice. Their off-screen relationship was later resolved. A contract was even drawn up to lend them out for the roles of Butler and OHara in Gone with the Wind, but that prospect failed to materialise.Flynn was a member of the Cricket Club with Niven. His suave, debonair, and devil-may-care attitude toward both ladies and life has been immortalised in the English language by author Benjamin S. Johnson as, Errolesque, in his treatise on the subject, An Errolesque Philosophy on Life.(Image:Errol Flynn in Operation Burma.jpg|thumb|As Capt. Nelson in Burma! (1945).When Flynn became a naturalised American citizen on 15 August 1942, he also became eligible for the military draft, as the United States had entered World War II eight months earlier. Grateful to the country that had given him fame and wealth,(Basinger, Jeanine: The Star Machine, p. 247.) Flynn attempted to join every branch of the armed services. But Flynn had several health problems. His heart was enlarged, with a murmur, and hed already suffered at least one heart attack. That was not all: he had recurrent malaria (contracted in Guinea), chronic back pain (for which he self-medicated with morphine and later, with heroin), lingering chronic tuberculosis, and numerous venereal diseases. Flynn, famous for his athletic roles and promoted as a paragon of physical beauty, was classified 4-F  unqualified for military service for not meeting the physical fitness standards.((Thomas, Tony Errol Flynn: The Spy Who Never Was)This created a public image problem for both Flynn and Warner Brothers. Flynn was often criticised for his failure to enlist while continuing to play war heroes in films. The studios failure to counter the criticism was due to a desire to hide the state of Flynns health.By the 1950s, Flynn had become a parody of himself. Heavy alcohol and drug abuse left him prematurely aged and bloated, but he won acclaim as a drunken neer-do-well in The Sun Also Rises (1957), and as his idol Barrymore in Much, Too Soon (1958).As a curious postscript to his life of adventure, Flynn went to Cuba in late 1958 to meet with the rebel leader Castro. Flynn was a great supporter of Castro and narrated a short movie titled Cuban Story:The Truth About Fidel Castro Revolution,() one of his last works as an actor. His autobiography, My Wicked, Wicked Ways, was published shortly after his death and contains humorous anecdotes about Hollywood. According to one literary critic, the book remains one of the most compelling and appalling autobiographies written by a Hollywood star, or anyone else for that matter.(Caterson, Simon, Genius for living driven by lust for death, Literary Review, 3 June 2009, retrieved 6 June 2009 http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/story/0,25197,25542210-25132,00.html) Flynn wanted to call the book In Like Me, but the publisher refused. In 1984, CBS produced a television film based on Flynns autobiography, starring Regehr as Flynn.Flynn starred in a 1956 series The Errol Flynn Theatre that was filmed in England, where he presented the episodes and sometimes appeared in them. About this time he also guest starred on NBCs comedy/variety show, Martha Raye Show. Flynn and Aadland met with Kubrick to discuss appearing together in Lolita.()Flynns adventure novel Showdown, was published in 1946. His first book, Beam Ends, an autobiographical account of his sailing trips around Australia, had been published in 1937.Personal lifeLifestyleFlynn had a reputation for womanising, consumption of alcohol and brawling. His freewheeling, hedonistic lifestyle caught up with him in November 1942 when two under-age girls, Betty Hansen and Peggy Satterlee, accused him of rape.() A group was organised to support Flynn, named the American Boys Club for the Defense of Errol Flynn (ABCDEF); its members included F. Buckley, Jr.(Valenti, Peter Errol Flynn: A Bio-Bibliography) The trial took place in January and February 1943, and Flynn was cleared of the charges. The incident served to increase his reputation as a ladies man, which led to the popular phrase like Flynn.()Marriages and familyFile:Damita & Flynn.jpg|thumb|Flynn and first wife Damita at Los Angeles airport in 1941.Flynn was married three times: to actress Damita from 1935 until 1942 (one son, Flynn, born 1941, reported missing in Cambodia in 1970 and presumed dead); to Eddington from 1943 until 1949 (two daughters, Deirdre born 1945 and Rory born 1947); and to actress Wymore from 1950 until his death (one daughter, Arnella Roma, 195398). In Hollywood, he tended to refer to himself as Irish rather than Australian (his father Thomson Flynn had been a biologist and a professor at the University of Belfast in Ireland during the latter part of his career). Flynn lived with Wymore in Antonio, Jamaica in the 1950s. He was largely responsible for developing tourism to this area, and for a while owned the Titchfield Hotel, which was decorated by the artist Lehmann. He also popularised trips down rivers on bamboo rafts.()Flynn was a long-time friend of the painter Smirnoff, who painted his portrait several times, as well as those of Lili Damita, Patrice Wymore and celebrity friends such as G. Robinson, Harlow, Shearer and Stanwyck.(Napier-Ford, Noel: Smirnoff biography for Sir Peter Michaels restaurant The Vineyard)In the late 1950s, Flynn met and courted the 15-year-old Aadland at the Professional School, casting her in his final film, Rebel Girls (1959). According to Aadland, he planned to marry her and move to their new house in Jamaica, but during a trip together to Vancouver, British Columbia, he died of a heart attack at the age of 50.His only son, Sean, an actor and later a noted war correspondent, disappeared in Cambodia in 1970 during the War while working as a freelance photojournalist for Time magazine.(The search for Sean Flynn continues: Magazine: mensvogue.com) Flynn was presumed dead in 1971, probably murdered by the communist Rouge. In 1984, he was officially declared dead in a granted petition of declaration sought by his mother, Lili Damita. Seans life was recounted in Inherited Risk by Jeffrey Meyers (Simon & Schuster), and he is also mentioned on page 194 in the Colleagues section of Dispatches by Herr.Flynns daughter Rory has one son, Sean Rio Flynn, named after her half-brother. He is an actor.() Rory Flynn has written a book about her father entitled The Baron of Mulholland: A Daughter Remembers Errol Flynn.DeathFlynn flew with Aadland to Vancouver on 9 October 1959, to lease his yacht Zaca to millionaire George Caldough. On 14 October, Caldough was driving Flynn to the airport when Flynn felt ill. He was taken to the apartment of Caldoughs friend, Dr. Grant Gould, uncle of pianist Gould. A party ensued, with Flynn regaling guests with stories and impressions. Feeling ill again, he announced I shall return and retired to a bedroom to rest. A half hour later, Aadland checked in on him and discovered him unconscious. Flynn had suffered a heart attack. According to the Sun (16 December 2006), When Errol Flynn came to town in 1959 for a week-long binge that ended with him dying in a West End apartment, his local friends propped him up at the Hotel Georgia lounge so that everyone would see him. The story is a myth; following Flynns death, his body was turned over to a coroner (George Brayshaw), who performed an autopsy, and released his body to his next of kin.Errol Flynn is interred in Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery, in Glendale, California. Both of his parents survived him.Posthumous allegationsIn 1961, Florence Aadland co-authored with Tedd Thomey Big Love, a book alleging Flynn was involved in a sexual relationship with her 15-year-old daughter, actress Beverly.()() It was later made into a play starring Ullman.()()In 1980, author Charles Higham published a controversial biography, Errol Flynn: The Untold Story, in which he alleged that Flynn was a fascist sympathiser who spied for the Nazis before and during World War II.()(Charles Higham The missing Errol Flynn file, New Statesman, 17 April 2000) The book also alleged he was bisexual.( In 2000, Higham wrote an article that also claimed that Flynn was previously accused of sympathising with Hitler based on his association with Dr. Erben, an Austrian who served in the German military intelligence, and that declassified files held by the CIA show that, in an intercepted letter in September 1933, Flynn wrote to Erben: A slimy Jew is trying to cheat me  I do wish we could bring Hitler over here to teach these Isaacs a thing or two. The bastards have absolutely no business probity or honour whatsoever.( Unreleased MI5 files held by the British Home Office were claimed in 2000 to demonstrate Flynn worked for the Allies during the war.() That Flynn was bisexual was also claimed by Bret in Errol Flynn: Satans Angel, although Bret denounced the Nazi claims.Subsequent biographies  notably Tony Thomas Errol Flynn: The Spy Who Never Was (Citadel, 1990) and Buster Wiles My Days With Errol Flynn: The Autobiography of a Stuntman (Roundtable, 1988)  have rejected Highams claims as pure fabrication. Flynns political leanings, say these biographies, appear to have been leftist: he was a supporter of the Spanish Republic in the Civil War and of the Revolution, even narrating a documentary titled Cuban Story( shortly before his death. Flynn also wrote, financed and starred in the film Rebel Girls in which his character helps Castros revolution. Flynn defended his visit to Cuba in an appearance on a Broadcasting Company television game show Page Challenge early in 1959. According to his autobiography, he considered Castro a close personal friend and drinking partner.Film portrayals* Regehr portrayed Flynn in a 1985 American TV movie My Wicked, Wicked Ways, loosely based on Flynns autobiography of the same name.*Pearce played Errol Flynn in the 1996 Australian film Flynn, which covers Flynns youth and early manhood, ending before the start of his Hollywood career.*Flynn was portrayed by Law in Scorseses 2004 film The Aviator.*The character of film star Neville Sinclair, played by Dalton in the 1991 film The Rocketeer, was thought by many film critics to be loosely based on Flynn, although in one scene Flynn is specifically shown as a different person.*The character of Alan Swann, portrayed by OToole in the 1982 film Favorite Year, was based on Flynn.(p.19 Film British Federation of Film Societies 1984)FilmographyBooks by FlynnFlynn wrote the following books:*Beam Ends (1937)*Showdown (1946)*Wicked, Wicked Ways, with ghost-writer Conrad (1959)Posthumous cultural references*Errol Flynns life was the subject of the opera Flynn (197778) by British composer Bingham. The score is titled: Music-theatre on the life and times of Errol Flynn, in three scenes, three solos, four duets, a mad song and an interlude(Judith Bingham in Interview, Tempo, No.58 (2004), pp.2036)*Crawl recorded a lyrical biography of Flynn, Errol, released in July 1989 and reached No.18 on the Australian singles charts. The song was taken from the album Sirocco, named after one of Flynns yachts.*In June 2009 the Errol Flynn Society of Tasmania Inc. organised the Errol Flynn Centenary Celebration, a 10-day series of events designed to celebrate the 100th anniversary of his birth( Be in like Flynn to 10 days of events!) On the actual centenary, 20 June 2009, his daughter Rory Flynn unveiled a star with his name on the footpath outside Hobarts heritage State Cinema.()*The Pirates Daughter, a 2008 Australian novel by Margaret Cezair-Thompson, is a fictionalised account of Flynns later life.(Jamaica beguiles as fact inspires fiction)*Tropes(http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/Flynning) uses flynning as a name for the simplified form of stage fighting with swords, where actors or stuntmen use overly large movements and aim primarily for their opponents weapons, rather than actually trying to hit an enemy.*Flynn is mentioned in the song Oklahoma U.S.A., found on the album Hillbillies by Kinks, where the subject daydreams that Errol Flynn is going to take her away...*Flynn is mentioned in the song Cashmere Thoughts, from the album Doubt by Jay-Z.  Errol Flynn, hot like heroin...*Polanskis 1986 film, Pirates was intended to pay homage to the beloved Errol Flynn swashbucklers of his childhood.(Pirates review by Roger Ebert, July 18, 1986)*Flynn is mentioned in the song Blood on the Rooftops, from the album and Wuthering by Genesis:  The trouble was started by a young Errol Flynn... Flynn is also mentioned in I Hope I Didnt Just Give Away The Ending by the New Radicals.*On Girls, Emily Gilmore wanted to marry Errol Flynn and wanted her husband, Richard, to grow a mustache like Flynns.*The character Eugene Fitzherbert/Flynn Rider from the 2010 film Tangled was named Flynn in homage to Errol Flynn, as the two share character traits.*On series Californication, season 2 episode 11, Lew Ashby mentions Errol Flynn used to swing from that thing, referring to the chandelier that had just fallen from the ceiling.ReferencesOn the series Californication,Lew Ashby mentionsErrol Flynn used to swing from that thing,referring to the chandelier that had been broken down from the ceiling.Bibliography*Flynn, Errol. My Wicked, Wicked Ways: the Autobiography of Errol Flynn. Intro. by Jeffrey Meyers. New York: Cooper Square Press, 2003. Rpt. of My Wicked, Wicked Ways. New York: G.P. Putnams sons, 1959. ISBN 0-8154-1250-9. External links**Flynn, Errol (19091959) National Library of Australia, Trove, People and Organisation record for Errol Flynn*Errol Flynn at the National Film and Sound Archive* Errol Flynns official web site, owned by daughter, Rory Flynn* Errol Flynn centenary 19092009 article by Nick Thomas in Washington Post* Profile @ Classic Movies* Errol Flynn Resource Website Flynn resource website, filmography & photographs.* Programs and related material in the National Library of Australias PROMPT collection*His Wicked Wicked Ways: Flynns 100th Birthday* Errol Flynn segment from The Collectors*Errol Flynns Cuban Adventures by BBC News* Errol Flynn & Patrice Wymore Marry in Monaco  TCM Movie Morlocks* *  2011 interview with daughter Rory Flynn in book, Raised by the StarsFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnja:FlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFlynnFllnszh:
67596
Transport_in_Anguilla
One of the overseas territories, the Caribbean island of Anguilla measures only  long by  wide, so transport is simpler than in many countries.  There is no transport, such as bus or rail systems, since there isnt enough need.  However, Anguillas roads are better maintained than on many Caribbean islands. Cars are the main means of transport, with driving on the left-hand side of the road, as in the Kingdom.  Although speed limits rarely exceed  per hour and traffic moves slowly, with the islands small size it doesnt take long to get anywhere.  Taxi service is unmetered, with set rates published in tourist guides.  In addition to regular transport, taxis often offer island tours lasting several hours.  Fares must be paid in cash.  Ferries offer transport from Anguilla to other islands.  The ferry from Point to Marigot, Martin, known to the locals as the Haddad Express, runs all day on the half hour, into the night time.  With no reservations required, taking the ferry is simple and inexpensive.  Ferries can also be chartered to other destinations.Other means of transport include bikes, mopeds, motorcycles and walking.  Because off the territorys small land mass and flatter terrain, these methods make more sense on Anguilla than on many other Caribbean islands.Cars, bikes,mopeds and mortorcycles are all available for rental at reasonable prices.  Both well-known car rental agencies and local companies operate rental businesses.  Groups may also charter a private bus for excursions.A railway was built to support phosphate mining on Sombrero Island.() Statistics Railways: 0 kmHighways:total: 175 kmcountry comparison to the world: 209paved: 82 kmunpaved: 93 km (2004)Waterways: nonePorts and harbours: Blowing Point, Road BayMerchant marine: none (2002 est.)Airports: 3 (2008):country comparison to the world: 193Airports - with paved runways:total: 1 (2008)The runway at Wallblake Airport was completely rebuilt and extended to 5,462 feet, opening to full use in January 2005.  It can accommodate virtually any business jet currently flying.Image:Anguilla-wallblake-airport.jpg Airports - with unpaved runways:total: 2under 914 m: 2 (2008):See also : AnguillaReferences
68284
Chop_suey
Chop suey  (lassorted pieces) is a Chinese dish consisting of meats (often chicken, fish, beef, shrimp (UK: prawns) or pork) and eggs, cooked quickly with vegetables such as bean sprouts, cabbage, and celery and bound in a starch-thickened sauce. It is typically served with rice but can become the Chinese-American form of mein with the addition of stir-fried noodles.Chop suey has become a prominent part of Chinese cuisine, cuisine, Chinese cuisine, Chinese cuisine, and cuisine. In Chinese cuisine it is known as cai (, mixed vegetables) and mainly consists of vegetables.OriginImage:Chopsueywithrice.jpg|thumb|right|250px|Chop suey, made with garlic chicken and peapods, on ricethumb|Far East Chop Suey restaurant in Little Tokyo, Los Angeles: Restaurants like this are now rare, but were once a common sight in the United States.Chop suey is widely believed to have been invented in America by Chinese immigrants, but in fact comes from Taishan (Toisan), a district of Province (Canton), which was the home of many of the early Chinese immigrants to the US. The Hong Kong doctor Shu-fan reported that he knew it in Taishan in the 1890s.(E.N.Anderson, Jr. and Marja L. Anderson, Modern China: South in K.C. Chang, Food in Chinese Culture: Anthropological and Historical Perspectives, Yale, 1977. p. 355.)Chop suey appears in a 1884 article in the Brooklyn Eagle, by Chin Foo, Chinese Cooking, which he says may justly be called the national dish of China. (Andrew Coe, Chop Suey: A Cultural History of Chinese Food in the United States (New York: Oxford University Press,  2009), p. 155.) An 1888 description calls it  A staple dish for the Chinese gourmand is chow chop svey sic, a mixture of chickens livers and gizzards, fungi, bamboo buds, pigs tripe, and bean sprouts stewed with spices.(Current Literature, October 1888, p. 318, as quoted in the English Dictionary, Second Edition, 1989.)  In 1898, it is described as A Hash of Pork, with Celery, Onions, Bean Sprouts, etc.(Louis Joseph Beck, New Yorks Chinatown: An Historical Presentation of Its People and Places, p. 50 full text at Google Books)Despite its Taishan (Toisan) background, there are various colorful stories about its origin, which Davidson (1999) characterizes as culinary mythology: Some say it was invented by Chinese immigrant cooks working on the States railroad in the 19th century. Another story is that it was invented during Dynasty premier Hongzhangs visit to the United States in 1896 by his chef, who tried to create a dish suitable for both Chinese and American palates.(The Facts on File Encyclopedia or Word and Phrase Origins, Checkmark Books, New York, 2000.)(Herbert Asbury, The Barbary Coast ) Yet another is that, in the 1860s, a Chinese restaurant cook in San Francisco was forced to serve something to drunken miners after hours, when he had no fresh food. To avoid a beating, the cook threw leftovers in a wok and served the miners who loved it and asked what dish is this--he replied Chopped Sui.( Joseph R. Conlin, Bacon, Beans and Galantines: Food and Foodways on the Western Mining Frontier, University of Nevada Press: Reno 1986, p. 192-3) There is no good evidence for any of these stories.(Renqiu Yu, Chop Suey: From Chinese Food to Chinese American Food, in Chinese America: History and Perspectives (1987) (not seen), as reported in Madeline Y. Hsu, From Chop Suey to Mandarin Cuisine: Fine Dining and the Refashioning of Chinese Ethnicity During the Cold War Era, in Sucheng Chan, Madeline Yuan-yin Hsu, eds., Chinese Americans and the Politics of Race and Culture  (Philadelphia: Temple University Press,  2008): 173193. full text in PDF)Outside of Taishan (Toisan), the name chop suey or shap sui in Cantonese,( and za sui, when used in Mandarin, has the somewhat different meaning of cooked animal offal or entrails. For example, in the classic novel to the West (circa 1590), Wukong tells a lion-monster in chapter 75: When I passed through Guangzhou , I bought a pot for cooking za sui - so Ill savour your liver, entrails, and lungs.  This may be the same as the Chop Suey Kiang found in 1898 New York.(During his exile in the United States, Qichao, a Guangdong(Canton) native, wrote in 1903 that there existed in the United States a food item called chop suey which was popularly served by Chinese restaurateurs, but which local Chinese people did not eat.(Liang, Q. (1903)  (in the New Continent). Beijing: Social Sciences Documentary Press (reprint 2007). ISBN 7802304717.) The term za sui () is found in newer Chinese-English dictionaries with both meanings listed: cooked entrails, and chop suey in the Western sense. See also * in North America* SubgumReferences* E.N. Anderson, The Food of China, Yale University Press, 1988.* Andrew Coe, Chop Suey: A Cultural History of Chinese Food in the United States, 2009. ISBN 0195331079.* Alan Davidson, Oxford Companion to Food, 1999.* Monica Eng, Chop Suey or Hooey? Orig Chicago Tribune, January 4, 2006, online rpr. Honolulu Advertiser, http://the.honoluluadvertiser.com/article/2006/Jan/04/il/FP601040308.html/?printonNotesExternal links* Snopes: Urban Legends Reference Pages: Chop Suey* Chop Suey was invented, fact or fiction?* Chinese-American Museum of ChicagosueySueysueysueycairizseshsnl:Tjaptjoija:sueysueysueyzh:
68939
Economy_of_Barbados
spelling        Since achieving independence in 1966, the island nation of Barbados has transformed itself from a low-income economy dependent upon sugar production, into an upper-middle-income economy based on tourism and the offshore sector.  Barbados went into a deep recession in the 1990s after 3 years of steady decline brought on by fundamental macroeconomic imbalances. After a painful readjustment process, the economy began to grow again in 1993. Growth rates have averaged between 3%-5% since then.  The countrys three main economic drivers are: tourism, the international business sector, and foreign direct-investment. These are supported in part by Barbados operating as a service-driven economy and an international business centre.HistoryPre-independenceSince the first settlement by the British in 1625, through history the economy of Barbados was primarily dependent on agriculture.  It had been recorded that minus the marshes and gully regions, during the 1630s much of the desirable land had been deforested across the entire island.  Quickly Barbados was then divided into large estate-plantations and using indentured labour mainly from the British Isles for the cultivation of tobacco and cotton crops were first introduced.  The island, facing a large amount of competition from the North American colonies and the neighbouring West Indian islands, switched to the crop of cane. Cultivation of sugar cane was quickly introduced by the exiled Jewish community which immigrated into Barbados from Brazil during the mid-17th century. The introduction of sugar cane became the single best move for the Barbados economy at the time, the economy boomed and Barbados had become populated with so many windmills that the island had the second highest density of windmills per square mile in the world, second only to the Netherlands http://www.barbados.org/windmill.htm. For about the next 100 years Barbados remained the richest of all the European colonies in the Caribbean region due to sugar.  The prosperity in the colony of Barbados remained regionally unmatched until sugar cane production caught up in geographically larger countries such as Haiti, Jamaica and elsewhere. Despite being eclipsed by larger makers of sugar, Barbados continued to produce the crop well into the 20th century and to this day.With the emancipation of African slaves in the Empire in 1834, thereafter many Bajans started to place more emphasis on upward mobility and strong education to combat plantation living.During the 1930s, politicians in Barbados started a push for more self-government along with Barbados seeking to retain more of the profits from economic growth within the country. Much of the profits were being repatriated by the British government to the United Kingdom. As the 1940s-1950s rolled around, Barbados moved towards developing political ties with neighboring Caribbean islands. By 1958 the Indies Federation was created by Britain for Barbados and nine other Caribbean territories.  The Federation was first led by the premier of Barbados, however the experiment ended by 1962. Later Barbados tried to negotiate several other unions with other islands, yet it became likely that Barbados needed to move on.  The island peacefully negotiated with Britain its own independence and became a sovereign nation at midnight on 30 November 1966.Post independenceFile:Barbados GDP per capita.svg|thumb|400px|The per capita of Barbados from 1960 to 2002 in contstant year 2000 US$Following independence from the United Kingdom on 30 November 1966 sugar cane still remained a chief money-maker for Barbados. The islands politicians tried to diversify the economy from just agriculture.  During the 1950s-1960s visitors from both Canada and the United Kingdom started transforming tourism into a huge contributor for the Barbadian economy. The man-made Water Harbour port at Bridgetown had been completed in 1961, and there-after the island could handle most modern ocean going ships for shipping sugar or handling cargoes at the port facility.As 1970s progressed, global companies started to recognize Barbados for its highly educated population. In May 1972 Barbados formed its own Central Bank, breaking off from the Caribbean Currency Authority (ECCA). By 1975 the Barbadian dollar was changed to a new fixed / constant rate of exchange rate with the US$ with the rate being changed to present day US$1  BDS$1.98 (BDS$1.00  ~US$0.50).By the 1980s a growing manufacturing industry was seen as a considerable earner for the Barbados economy.  With manufacturing then being led by companies such as Corporation() and others,() the Manufacturing industry contributed greatly to the economy during the 1980s and early 1990s. align  rightIn the early 1990s the countrys economy was hid hard when real per capita declined by 5.1% per year between 1989 and 1992 partly due to the 1990 oil price spike.  Barbados entered into an agreement with the Monetary Fund financial assistance after a long and hard period of negotiations between the IMF, the government of Barbados, labour unions and employers. This led to a protocol on wages and prices in 1993.  This helped prevent an inflationary spiral and restored the islands international competitiveness thereby leading to a period of long term economic growth of 2.7% between 1993 and 2000.(As one of the founding members, Barbados joined the World Trade Organization on 1 January 1995. Following the membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Government of Barbados aggressively tried to make the Barbados economy fully WTO compliant.  This led to collapse of much of the manufacturing industry of Barbados during the late 1990s in favour of many companies like Intel and others moving to lower cost Asian economies. During the late 1990s more companies started to become interested in Barbados offshore sector, until it over took sugar as the new chief money maker. In 1999-2000 the for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) blacklist was circulated with Barbados listed in error.  The negative fallout stymied new investment into Barbados offshore sector Barbados for near two years as Barbados authorities acted swiftly successfully proving that Barbados economy was regulated sufficiently to ward off financial criminal activity and that it was not a tax haven as charged, but instead a low-tax regime.As the global recession hit in 2001, the offshore sector in Barbados slightly contracted further thereby making Tourism as the new chief money maker, after having earlier eclipsed manufacturing and sugar cane. The Government of Barbados further changed legislation to transform the Barbados economy into one which fosters investment. Leading to several new Hotel developments.  The government continues to try maintaining constraint from personal involvement in the Hotel activity and instead seeks private investment into the Barbados economy for future growth.Several large hotel projects like the Charles Marina project in Speightstown helped the tourism industry continue to expand in 1996-99, and more recently the new Hilton Hotel on Needhams Point, Saint Michael in 2005.Various firms from Street in New York provide routine economic analysis of the Barbadian economy.  This has included such firms as & Poors() and Moodys.( )CurrentOffshore finance and informatics are important foreign exchange earners, and there is also a light manufacturing sector. The government continues its efforts to reduce the unacceptably high unemployment rate which it met in the 1990s, encourage direct foreign investment, and privatize remaining state-owned enterprises.The main factors responsible for the improvement in economic activity include an expansion in the number of tourist arrivals, an increase in manufacturing, and an increase in sugar production. Recently, offshore banking and financial services also have become an important source of foreign exchange and growth.Economic growth has led to net increases in employment in the tourism sector, as well as in construction and other services sub-sectors of the economy. The public service remains Barbados largest single employer. Total labor force has increased from 126,000 in 1993 to 140,000 persons in 2000, and unemployment has dropped significantly from over 20% in the early 1990s to 9.3% at the end of 2000.The Barbados government encourages the development in: financial services, informatics, e-commerce, tourism, educational and health services, and cultural services for the future.  In 2000 based on Barbados level of growth - (at the time) Barbados was supposed to become the worlds smallest developed country by 2008.  This had then been restated as being achievable by around 2025.()WagesBarbadians have ranked as being on the high end of wages in the Americas.() The only legislated minimum wage in Barbados is for shop assistants, where wages can be no less than BDS$5.00 (~ US$2.50) per hour.()In October 2009, Dr. Delisle Worrell, who is slated to become the replacement Governor of Barbados Bank of Barbados and current Executive Director of the Centre for Money and Finance at the UWI Cave Hill Campus revealed that the average Barbadian now earns between BDS$200 and BDS$499 per week....( )Overall estimates of his finds showed that:(*There was a roughly 4,400 workers, who earned less than BDS$200 per week.*There were 32,800 workers who earned between BDS$200 and BDS$499 a week.*About 19,100 workers who earned from BDS$500 to BDS$999,*3,700 workers who earned between BDS$1000 and BDS$1300, and*4,100 who earned more than BDS$1300 a week.TaxationGeneralIn 1997 Barbados implemented a general taxation which covers most items.  Known as the Value-Added Tax (VAT) it covers almost all items at a 15% tax rate and a 7.5% for hotel accommodations.  Exported goods and services, prescription drugs and a few other specific items are zero rated under the legislation.  The VAT replaced several other taxes such as: the Consumption Tax, Stamp Duty, Surcharge, Excise Tax and an Environmental Levy.The island continues to wean off of taxes outside of the VAT system.  In 2002 the Barbados government increased the level of people in Barbados who are exempt from having to pay taxes on their homes. This has steadily grown with the island heading for a possible rate of 0% taxation in all other areas.The government has also toyed with the idea of making retirement savings as tax exempt, to encourage Barbadians to spend less on goods and to encourage Barbadians to save more income as they once used to.()Bilateral treatiesBarbados has several bilateral tax treaties, mostly aimed at removing double taxation on companies that operate in the Barbados economy.  Since Barbados is at times considered an expensive place to conduct business, the treaties are mainly a measure to provide some savings to international businesses operating in Barbados.  Some of the countries which Barbados has taxation agreements with are:*Botswana,*Canada,*China,()*CARICOM,*Cuba,*Finland,*Malta,*Mauritius,*Mexico,*Norway,*Sweden,*Switzerland,*the United Kingdom,*the United States and*Venezuela.Source: Barbados Government website containing the text of the majority of the above tax treatiesThe bilateral tax treaty negotiated with Canada in particular has been a political-football for the government of that country.  The treaty was made to allow the profits for IBCs and banking companies to be repatriated to Canada tax-free after paying taxes in Barbados.  The aim was mainly for companies like the Imperial Bank of Commerce (CIBC), Bank of Canada (RBC), and Scotiabank, which (along with Barclays of the United Kingdom), when-combined control a healthy majority of Barbados local Commercial Banking sector.  In essence the treaty makes the economy of Barbados almost an unofficial part of the Canadian economy and it was aimed at allowing Canadian companies to extract profits back to Canada more easily.  During the Canadian national elections of 2003 and 2006, it was cited that the former Minister of Finance and later Prime Minister Martin had international shipping companies that operated in Barbados offshore sector under the bilateral treaty possibly saving his company from higher taxes in Canada.Primary industriesAgricultureAndrew, Barbados 040.jpg|thumb|The cultivation of sugar cane, such as the cane growing in this field outside Saint Andrew, has always been a big part of the islands economy.About 16,000 hectares (39,500 acres), or 37.2% of the total land area, are classified as arable. At one time, nearly all arable land was devoted to sugarcane, but the percentage devoted to ground crops for local consumption has been increasing. In 1999, 500,000 tons of sugarcane were produced, down from the annual average of 584,000 tons in 198991. In 2001, sugar exports amounted to US$22 million, or 8.4% of total exports. Major food crops (provisions) are yams, sweet potatoes, corn, eddoes, cassava, and several varieties of beans. Inadequate rainfall and lack of irrigation has prevented the development of other agricultural activity, although some vegetable farming takes place on a commercial scale. Some cotton is also grown in drier parts of the island, but until cotton can be picked by machine it is unlikely that output will rise to its former level.Animal husbandryLivestock rearing isnt a major occupation in Barbados, chiefly because good pasture has always been scarce & imported animal feed is expensive.The island must import large quantities of meat and dairy products. Most livestock is owned by individual households. Estimates for 1999 showed 23,000 head of cattle, 41,000 sheep, 33,000 hogs, 5,000 goats, and 4,000,000 chickens. Poultry production in 1999 included 9,000 tons of meat and 1,000 tons of hen eggs. Apart from self-sufficiency in milk and poultry, the limited agricultural sector means that Barbados imports large amounts of basic foods, including wheat and meat.FishingThe fishing industry employs about 2,000 persons, and the fleet consists of more than 500 powered boats. The catch in 2000 was 3,100 metric tons. Flying fish, dolphin fish, tuna, turbot, kingfish, and swordfish are among the main species caught. A fisheries terminal complex opened at Oistins in 1983.ForestryFewer than 20 hectares (50 acres) of original forests have survived the 300 years of sugar cultivation. There are an estimated 5,000 ha (12,350 acres) of forested land, covering about 12% of the total land area. Roundwood production in 2000 totaled 5,000 cu m (176,500 cu ft), and imports amounted to 3,000 cu m (106,000 cu ft). In 2000, Barbados imported $35.3 million in wood and forest products.MiningDeposits of limestone and coral were quarried to meet local construction needs. Production of limestone in 2000 amounted to 1.5 million tons. Clays and shale, sand and gravel, and carbonaceous deposits provided limited yields. Hydraulic cement production totalled 267,659 tons in 2000, up from 106,515 in 1996.Oil production is also undertaken in Barbados, with much of the on-shore activity taking place in Woodbourne, Saint Philip.( )Secondary industriesManufacturingThe manufacturing sector in Barbados has yet to recover from the recession of the late 1980s when bankruptcies occurred and almost one-third of the workforce lost their jobs. Today, approximately 10,000 Barbadians work in manufacturing. The electronics sector in particular was badly hit when the U.S. semi-conductor company, Intel, closed its factory in 1986. Leaving aside traditional manufacturing, such as sugar refining and rum distilling, Barbadoss industrial activity is partly aimed at the local market which produces goods such as tinned food, drinks, and cigarettes. Many industrial estates are located throughout the island. A cement factory is located in St.Lucy.The export markets have been severely damaged by competition from cheaper Caribbean and Latin American competitors. But domestic manufacturing also faces serious potential problems, as trade liberalization means that the government can no longer protect national industries by imposing high tariffs on imported goods. Thus, Barbadian manufacturers must compete with those from other regional economies, whose wage costs and other overheads are usually much lower. The other significant industrial employer is the petroleum sector, where oil deposits are located in the southern parishes but oil has not been produced in commercial quantities; although the islands small oil refinery was closed in 1998 and refining moved to Trinidad and Tobago, where labour and other costs are cheaper.ConstructionA construction boom, linked to tourism and residential development, has assisted the recovery of a large cement plant in the north of the island that was closed for some years and reopened in 1997.Tertiary industriesTourismTourism is Barbadoss crucial economic activity and has been since the 1960s. At least 10 percent of the working population (some 13,000 people) are employed in this sector, which offers a range of tourist accommodations from luxury hotels to modest self-catering establishments. After the recession years, tourism picked up again in the mid-1990s, only to face another slowdown in 1999. This drop was in part due to increasing competition from other Caribbean countries such as the Dominican Republic, and in part to a reduction in visits from cruise ships as they shifted to non-Caribbean routes or shorter routes such as the Bahamas. Cruise ship visitors totalled 445,821 in 1999, a reduction from 517,888 in 1997, but stay-over visitors rose to 517,869 in 1999, setting a new record. Overall, the country witnessed over US$700 million in tourism receipts in 1999.The real problem for Barbados is that tourist facilities are too densely concentrated on the south coast, which is highly urbanized, while the Atlantic coast, with its rugged shoreline and large waves, is not suitable for beach tourism. There are few large brand-name hotels (the Barbados Hilton was closed for refurbishment in 2000) which makes marketing the island in the United States difficult. On the other hand, the absence of conglomerates and package tours results in a far greater trickle-down of tourist spending among the general population.InformaticsInformatics employed almost 1,700 workers in 1999, about the same number as the sugar industry. The island has been involved in data processing since the 1980s and now specializes in operations such as database management and insurance claims processing. Costs in Barbados are higher than elsewhere in the Caribbean (although still only half of costs in the United States), but the island offers strong advantages such as a literate English-speaking workforce and location in the same time zone as the eastern United States. Despite these factors, employment has fallen in recent years, reflecting increasing mobility on the part of foreign companies, which frequently relocate to lower-cost areas.Financial servicesThe financial services sector has also faced problems as licenses issued to new financial companies have slowed down since 1998. There are an estimated 47 offshore banks, as well as hundreds of other insurance and investment companies, all catering to overseas clients. Figures are hard to track, but it is estimated that these financial activities earned BDS$150 million in foreign earnings in 1995. In 1998, approximately 7,500 people were employed in the banking and insurance sector. The financial sector is also under threat of sanctions from the EU and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), both of which have expressed concerns about money laundering, tax evasion, and other financial improprieties in Caribbean offshore centres.RumBarbados has three commercial rum distilleries: Indies Rum Distillers Ltd, Gay Rum and Four Square. There is also St. Nicholas Abbey, a smaller boutique operation.Retail053.jpg|thumb|The independent Woolworth store on Prince William Henry Street, BridgetownRetailing is an important economic activity, especially in Bridgetown where there are large department stores and supermarkets. In the countryside, most stores are small and family-run. Some 18,000 people work in the retail sector.Facts & figures; GDP (purchasing power parity):: $5.466 billion (2008 est.):county comparison to the world: 157; GDP (official exchange rate):: $3.777 billion (2008 est.); GDP - real growth rate:: 1.5% (2008 est.):county comparison to the world: 174; GDP - per capita (PPP):: $19,300 (2008 est.):county comparison to the world: 63; GDP - composition by sector::* agriculture: 6%:* industry: 16%:* services: 78% (2000 est.); Labor force:: 128,500 (2001 est.); Labor force - by occupation::* agriculture: 10%:* industry: 15%:* services: 75% (1996 est.); Unemployment rate:: 10.7% (2003 est.); Population below poverty line:: NA%; Household income or consumption by percentage share::* lowest 10%: NA%:* highest 10%: NA%; Inflation rate (consumer prices):: 5.5% (2007 est.); Budget::* revenues: $847 million (including grants):* expenditures: $886 million; including capital expenditures of $NA (2000 est.); Central Bank discount rate:: 12% (January 2008):county comparison to the world: 24; Agriculture - products:: sugarcane, vegetables, cotton; Industries:: tourism, sugar, light manufacturing, component assembly for export; Industrial production growth rate:: -3.2% (2000 est.):county comparison to the world: 161; Electricity - production:: 1.003 billion kWh (2007):county comparison to the world: 145; Electricity - consumption:: 939.9 million kWh (2007):county comparison to the world: 145; Electricity - exports:: 0 kWh (2003); Electricity - imports:: 0 kWh (2003); Oil - production::  (2007):county comparison to the world: 104; Oil - consumption::  (2006 est.):county comparison to the world: 149; Oil - exports::  (2005):county comparison to the world: 116; Oil - imports::  (2005):county comparison to the world: 136; Oil - proved reserves::  (1 January 2008 est.):county comparison to the world: 93; Natural gas - production:: 29.17 million cu m (2006 est.):county comparison to the world: 85; Natural gas - consumption:: 29.17 million cu m (2006 est.):county comparison to the world: 109; Natural gas - exports:: 0 cu m (2007 est.):county comparison to the world: 200; Natural gas - imports:: 0 cu m (2007 est.):county comparison to the world: 199; Natural gas - proved reserves:: 141.6 million cu m (1 January 2008 est.):county comparison to the world: 101; Exports:: $385 million (2006):county comparison to the world: 170; Exports - commodities:: manufactures, sugar and molasses, rum, other foods and beverages, chemicals, electrical components; Exports - partners:: Trinidad and Tobago 15.5%, Jamaica 13.5%, UK 9.4%, US 9.3%, Brazil 8.3%, Saint Lucia 7.2%, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 4.5% (2007); Imports:: $1.586 billion (2006):county comparison to the world: 158; Imports - commodities:: consumer goods, machinery, foodstuffs, construction materials, chemicals, fuel, electrical components; Imports - partners:: US 37.7%, Trinidad and Tobago 22.6%, UK 5.9% (2006); Debt - external:: $668 million (2003):county comparison to the world: 159; Economic aid - recipient:: $2.07 million (2005); Currency (code):: Barbadian dollar (BBD); Exchange rates:: Barbadian dollars per US dollar - NA (2007), 2 (2006), 2 (2005), 2 (2004), 2 (2003); Fiscal year:: 1 April - 31 MarchFurther reading* The Commonwealth of Nations - Barbados economy* Totally Barbados - Economy*   Barbados Private Sector Trade Team* * * See also*Barbados*dollar*Bank of Barbados*of Barbadian companiesReferencesExternal links* CIA World Factbook*Barbados Eligible For Dividend Tax Benefits, Says IRS - Tax-News.com*Standard & Poors review on Bdos Economy -- Positive points - 27 July 2006*WTO reports on trade policy of Barbados - 18 September 2008*WTO announces role for Barbados in Task Force - February, 09th, 2006* A summary of the Budget - The Bdos Annual budget for the year 2006-2007* Value Added Tax refunds total $44.2M (US$22.1M)* Barbados 2005 economic performance to be reviewedde Barbadosde Barbadosde la Barbadede Barbadosdi Barbadosekonomikade Barbadosde Barbados
69753
New_Hope
New Hope may refer to:PlacesIn the United States:*Hope, Alabama*Hope, Florida*Hope, Georgia *Hope, Kentucky*Hope, Minnesota*Hope, Mississippi*Hope, North Carolina*Hope, Ohio*Hope, Pennsylvania*Hope, Tennessee*Hope, Texas, in Collin County*Hope, Smith County, Texas*Hope, Sunnyvale, Texas, in Dallas County*Hope, Virginia (disambiguation), several places*Hope, West Virginia (disambiguation), several places*Hope, Wisconsin*Hope Creek, a waterway in central North Carolina**Hope Valley**Hope Valley Railway*Hope Rosenwald School, listed on the National Register of Historic Places near Fredonia, AlabamaOther uses*Hope Academy, a private school in Landover Hills, Prince Georges County, Maryland, USA*Hope Christian Fellowship, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA*Hope Christian Schools, Oregon, USA*Hope Coal, an Australian coal mining company*Hope (Macau), a political party in Macau*Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, the first released Star Wars filmSee also*Hope High School (disambiguation)*Hope School (disambiguation)HopeHopeHopeHopeHopeHopeHope
70489
Geordie
Geordie () is a regional nickname for a person from the Tyneside() region of the north east of England, or the name of the English-language dialect spoken by its inhabitants. Depending on who is using it, the catchment area for the term Geordie can be as large as the whole of East England or Tyneside, or as small as the city of upon Tyne.  In most aspects Geordie speech is a direct continuation and development of the language spoken by the Anglo-Saxon settlers of this region. They consisted of mercenaries employed by the ancient Brythons to fight the Pictish invaders after the end of Roman rule in Britannia in the 5th century; the Angles, Saxons and Jutes who thus arrived became, over time, ascendant politically and  through population transfer from tribal homelands in northern Europe  culturally over the native British. The Anglo-Saxon kingdoms that emerged during the Dark Ages spoke largely mutually-intelligible varieties of what we now call English, each varying somewhat in phonology, morphology, syntax and lexicon. This Anglo-Saxon influence on Geordie can be seen today, to the extent that poems by the Anglo-Saxon scholar the Bede translates more successfully into Geordie than into modern day English.() Thus, in northern England, dominated by the kingdom of Northumbria, was found a distinct Northumbrian Old English dialect.In recent times Geordie has been used to refer to a supporter of Newcastle United football club,(Arca gives Boro spark to silence bigoted Geordie fans | Match Reports | guardian.co.uk Football) despite many Geordies supporting other local teams, and the Brown Ale() schooner glassware used to serve beer in the United States. Derivation of the term A number of rival theories explain how the term came about, though all accept that it derives from a familiar diminutive form of the name George,() which was a very common name among the pitmen()() (coal miners) in the north-east of England; indeed, it was once the most popular name for eldest sons in the region.One explanation is that it was established during the Jacobite Rebellion of 1745. The Jacobites declared that the natives of Newcastle were staunch supporters of the Hanoverian kings, in particular of George II during the 1745 rebellion. This contrasted with rural Northumbria, which largely supported the Jacobite cause. If true, the term may have derived from the popular anti-Hanoverian song Ye Oer Frae France?,(Recorded by the folk group Span on their album Parcel of Rogues, 1973.) which calls the first Hanoverian king Geordie Whelps, meaning George the Guelph.Another explanation for the name is that local miners in the north east of England used Geordie safety lamps, designed by Stephenson() in 1815, rather than the competing lamps designed by Davy which were used in other mining communities. Using the chronological order of two Trotter Brockett books, Geordie was given to North East pitmen; later he acknowledges that the pitmen also christened their Stephenson lamp Geordie.((Linguist Katie Wales() also dates the term earlier than does the English Dictionary; she observes that Geordy or Geordie) was a common name given to coal mine pit-men in ballads and songs of the region, noting that such usage turns up as early as 1793. It occurs in the titles of two songs by song-writer Joe Wilson (18411875): Geordy, Haud the Bairn and Keep your Feet Still, Geordie. Citing such examples as the song Geordy Black written by Rowland Harrison of Gateshead, she contends that, as a consequence of popular culture, the miner and the keelman had become icons of the region in the 19th century, and Geordie was a label that affectionately and proudly reflected this, replacing the earlier ballad emblem, the figure of Crankie.Newcastle publisher Frank Grahams Geordie Dictionary states: In Grahams many years of research, the earliest record he has found of the terms use was in 1823 by local comedian Billy Purvis. Purvis had set up a booth at the Newcastle Races on the Town Moor. In an angry tirade against a rival showman, who had hired a young pitman called Tom Johnson to dress as a clown, Billy cried out to the clown: (Rough translation: Oh man, who but a fool would have sold off his furniture and left his wife? Now, youre a fair downright fool, not an artificial fool like Billy Purvis! Youre a real Geordie! Go on, man, and hide yourself! Go on and get your picks axes again. You may do for the city, but never for the west end of our town!)Graham is backed up historically by Camden Hotten, who wrote in 1869: Geordie, general term in Northumberland and Durham for a pitman, or coal-miner. Origin not known; the term has been in use more than a century..() Geordie has also been documented for at least 180 to 240 years as meaning the whole of the North East of England..Bad-weather Geordy was a name applied to cockle sellers:Travel writer Scott Dobson used the term Geordieland in a 1973 guidebook to refer collectively to Northumberland and Durham.()Geographical coverageWhen referring to the people, as opposed to the dialect, dictionary definitions of a Geordie typically refer to a native or inhabitant of Newcastle upon Tyne, England, or its environs,(geordie - Definitions from Dictionary.com) an area that encompasses Tyneside, Newcastle, Tyneside and Gateshead.()() However, just as a Cockney is often colloquially defined as someone born within the sound of the bells, a Geordie can be defined as someone born within spitting distance of the Tyne.(Geordie Dialect - BBC) Another interpretation is the East of England.( People from Sunderland have been nicknamed Mackems in recent generations. However, the earliest known  use of the term found by an English Dictionary/Two public wordhunt()() occurred as late as 1988.()PhonologyVowelsCharacteristicsGeordie consonants generally follow those of Pronunciation. Some phonological characteristics specific to Geordie are listed as follows:*Geordie is non-rhotic, like most Anglo-English dialects. This means speakers do not pronounce  unless it is followed by a vowel sound in that same phrase or unit. The rhotic sound () in Geordie is pronounced as .*There is some differentiation in pronunciation in the Geordie dialect based upon the speakers sex. For example, English sound , pronounced generically in Geordie as , may also have other, more specific pronunciations depending upon whether one is male or female. Males alone often pronounce the sound  as , for example, the word house () pronounced as . Females, on the other hand, will often pronounce this sound as , thus: .* appearing in an unstressed final syllable of a word (such as in reading) is pronounced as  (thus, reading is ).* appearing at the end of a word (such as in sugar) is pronounced as  (thus, sugar is ).*coalescence in both stressed and unstressed syllables (so that dew becomes ).*glottalization, in which  is replaced by  before a syllabic nasal (e.g. button as ),  in absolute final position (get as ), and whenever the  is intervocalic so long as the latter vowel is not stressed (pity as ).* specifically in the words had, have, has and having is pronounced as .* specifically in words with the spelling ea (such as bread and deaf) may be pronounced as .* specifically at the ends of words, with the spelling ow (such as in throw and follow) is pronounced as  in monosyllabic words and  in polysyllabic words (thus, window as ).VocabularyGeordie has a large amount of vocabulary not heard elsewhere in England. In a newspaper survey, the Geordie accent was found to be the most attractive in England.(http://thescotsman.scotsman.com/uk/Scots-accent-is-UK39s-second.4525816.jp)Words still in common use by Geordie dialect speakers today include:*Aa/Aye/Ai, Yes()*aboot about(*aall, all(*baccy, tobacco ()*D/dee do(*dinnor, dinner(*haad hold example: keep a haad is keep a hold and had yer gob becomes keep quiet. E.g. ye cud hev keep a-hadden yor dog(*hinny a term of endearment - Honey(*hoy to throw()*hoose, house(*Ma/Mar/Mam, a variation of Mother(*mesel, myself(*nowt nothing(howay or haway is broadly comparable to the invocation Come on! or the French Allez-y! (Go on!).  Examples of common use include Howay man! or Haway man!, meaning come on or hurry up, Howay the lads! or Haway the lads! as a term of encouragement for a sports team for example (the players tunnel at St James Park has this phrase just above the entrance to the pitch), or Howay!? (with stress on the second syllable) expressing incredulity or disbelief.( The literal opposite of this word is haddaway (go away), which is not as popular as howay, but has found frequent use in the phrase Haddaway an shite (Tom Hadaway, Figure 5.2 Haddaway an shite; Cursing like sleet blackening the buds, raging at the monk of Jarrow scribbling his morality and judgement into a book.()).Divvie or divvy seems to come from the Co-op dividend,() or from the two Davy lamps (the more dangerous explosive Scotch Davy() used in 1850, commission disapproved of its use in 1886 (inventor not known, nicknamed Scotch Davy probably given by miners after the Davy lamp was made perhaps by north east miners who used the Stephenson Lamp(()), and the later better designed Davy designed by Davy also called the Divvy.()) As in a north east miner saying Marra, ye keep way from me if ye usin a divvy. It seems the word divvie then translated to daft lad/lass. Perhaps coming from the fact one would be seen as foolish going down a mine with a Scotch Divvy when there are safer lamps available, like the Geordie, or the Davy.The Geordie word netty,() meaning a toilet and place of need and necessity for relief(()() or bathroom,((( has an uncertain origin,() though some have theorised that it may come from slang used by Roman soldiers on Wall,( which may have later become gabinetti in the Romanic language( (such as in the Netty, the subject of a famous painting from Bob Olley()()).However gabbinetto is the Modern Italian diminutive of gabbia, which actually derives from the Latin cavea (hollow, cavity, enclosure), the root of the loanwords that became the English cave,http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?termcave cage,http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?termcage and gaol.http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?termjailThus, another explanation would be that it comes from a Modern Romanic Italian form of the word gabinetti,( though only a relatively small number of Italians have migrated to the North of England, mostly during the 19th century.()Some etymologists connect the word netty to the English  word needy.  John Trotter Brockett, writing in 1829 in his A glossary of north country words...,( claims that the etymon of netty (and its related form neddy) is the English needyhttp://www.etymonline.com/index.php?termneedy and need.http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?termneedBill Griffiths, in A Dictionary of North East Dialect, points to the earlier form, the Old English nd; he writes: MS locates a possible early ex. Robert Hovyngham sall make... at the other end of his house a knyttyng York 1419, in which case the root could be OE nd necessary.( Another related word, nessy is thought (by Griffiths) to derive from the Modern English necessary.(A poem called Yam narrated by author Douglas Kew, demonstrates the usage of a lot of Geordie words.()()In the mediaIn recent times, the Geordie dialect has featured prominently in the British media due to its alien dialect to much of the population but also its friendly appeal. Television presenters such as and Dec are now happy to use their natural accents on air.() Bentley, the commentator on the UK edition of Big Brother, is often perceived by southerners to have a Geordie dialect. However, he grew up in on Tees. Foster() and Waddell() have both worked as television sports commentators. Cole, a member of Aloud and judge on The X Factor, has a Geordie accent,() she says that shes proud to be Geordie! as does McElderry the winner of X Factor 2009.( In May 2011 Cheryl Cole was let go from the American version of the X Factor because its producers feared the American audience would not understand her Geordie accent.() while hosting during a May 2011 taping of Got Talent, another popular Geordie Donnelly made an apparent attempt to stand up for Cole by asking Can you understand my accent? .()The song Why Aye Man is also a popular Geordie song by Knopfler.The dialect was also popularized by the comic magazine Viz, where the dialect is often conveyed phonetically by unusual spellings within the comic strips. Viz magazine was founded on Tyneside by two locals, Donald and his brother Simon.The Coogan-helmed BBC comedy Alan Partridge featured a Geordie named Michael (Greenall) as the primary supporting character and de facto best friend of the eponymous hero, despite Partridges referring to Michael at one point as just the Work Geordie.The movie Goal!, which stars Becker and Nivola, prominently exposes the Newcastle football club, as well as exposing the Geordies and their dialect.Mike Neville and George House (aka Jarge Hoose), presenters of the BBC local news programme Look North, in the 1960s and 1970s, not only incorporated Geordie into the show, albeit usually in comedy pieces pointing up the gulf between ordinary Geordies and officials speaking English, but were responsible for a series of recordings, beginning with Larn Yersel Geordie() which attempted, not always seriously, to bring the Geordie dialect to the rest of England.The creator of Larn Yersel Geordie was local humorist Scott Dobson,() who wrote several booklets on the theme in the early 1970s, including History O the Geordies,() Advanced Geordie Palaver,()() The Geordie Joke Book (with Dick Irwin)() and The Little Broon Book (Bringing out The New Little Broon Book in 1990()).Jocks and the Geordies was a Dandy comic strip running from 1975 to the early 1990s.In the lyrics of the song Sailing to Philadelphia by Knopfler, Dixon describes himself as a Geordie boy. Dixon, surveyor of the line.() Knopfler also includes a Geordie reference in the song 5:15 AM, from the album Shangri-La: the bandit man / came up the great north road / up to geordieland / to mine the motherlode. In an earlier live album and video, Dire Straits Live, the band are seen in a pub - on the wall hangs a scoreboard for darts featuring Geordies vs. All Others.Dorfy, real name Dorothy Samuelson-Sandvid, was a noted Geordie dialect writer who once wrote for the South Shields Gazette.()()()()()Wiedersehen, Pet was a popular fictional British comedy-drama series about a group of seven British migrant construction workers:()() Wayne, Dennis, Oz, Bomber, Barry, Neville and Moxey, who, in Series 1, are living and working on a German building site. Three of the seven were Geordies. Dennis Patterson (played by Tim Healy) comes from Birtley Co. Durham; Oz Osborne (played by Nail) comes from Gateshead; and Hope (played by Whately) comes from North Shields.Hairy Bikers Cookbook with Geordie Simon King and Dave Myers. The duos lifestyle TV show is a mixture of cookery and travelogue.()In 1974, Prices Jarrow song reached number one in the old RNI International Service, and number 4 in the UK charts, which brought to the attention once again of the Jarrow March.()The character Detective Inspector Robert Robbie Lewis (formerly Detective Sergeant) in the long-running ITV series Inspector Morse is a self-described Geordie-- although not a professional one.  His speech variety serves as a foil to Morses pedantry and RP.On the arts program Aria and Pasta, the Northumbrian opera singer Sir Thomas Allen (who retains some Geordie vowels in his speech) described the dish he prepared as Geordie Pasta.The character Geordie Georgie, as portrayed by Tate in her eponymous TV show, is a Geordie, complete with a thick affected accent, and is portrayed regularly taking part in (mostly ridiculously ambitious) sponsored events for a North East based charity - the charity in question usually has a website with an outrageous name, for instance, the site for the charity she supports for battered husbands is www.chinnedbythemissus.co.uk. The sketches usually conclude with her remonstrating her co-worker Martin, sometimes by violent means, for his apparent non-support of her charitable crusades.()There is a new MTV Show called Shore...a spin-off of Shore.ReferencesExternal links* Newcastle English (Geordie)* Sounds Familiar? Listen to examples of Geordie and other regional accents and dialects of the UK on the British Librarys Sounds Familiar website*Hover & Hear Geordie pronunciations, and compare side by side with other accents from the UK and around the World.*http://howaythelads.com/introduction/geordieland/geordies - Find out about & learn the Geordie accentde:Geordiehe:nl:Geordienn:Geordiepl:Geordiesco:Geordiesv:Geordie
71071
Salt_Lake_County,_Utah
Salt Lake County is a county located in the state of Utah. It had a population of 1,029,655 at the 2010 census.(http://2010.census.gov/2010census/data/) Its seat and largest city is Lake City, the state capital and largest city. It occupies a valley, Lake Valley, as well as parts of the surrounding mountains, the Mountains to the west and the Range to the east. In addition, the Salt Lake is partially within the northwestern section of the county. The county is famous for its resorts, which led to Salt Lake City hosting the Winter Olympics.Salt Lake County is part of the Salt Lake City Metropolitan Statistical Area as well as the Salt Lake City&ndash;Ogden&ndash;Clearfield Combined Statistical Area.GeographyAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which   is land and  (8.72%) is water.Perhaps the most dominating physical feature in Salt Lake County are the Mountains in the eastern portion of the county, famous for both summer and winter activities. The snow in the region is often coined the Greatest Snow on Earth for its soft, powdery texture, and led to Lake City winning the bid for the Winter Olympics. In Salt Lake County there are four ski resorts; Snowbird and Alta in Cottonwood Canyon and Solitude and Brighton in Cottonwood Canyon. Hiking and camping are especially popular summer activities. Marking the western portion of the county are the Mountains. These two mountain ranges together, along with the much smaller Mountains to the south of the valley,  delimit Lake Valley, which is also flanked on the northwest by the Salt Lake.thumb|right|Salt Lake County as seen from space.All of the entrances to the valley are narrow. These include Canyon leading into Summit County to the northeast, Canyon leading into Morgan County, also to the northeast, the space between the Wasatch Mountains and the Great Salt Lake leading into Davis County to the north, the Point of the Mountain leading to Utah County to the south, and a space between the Oqiurrh Mountains and the Great Salt Lake leading to Tooele County to the northwest. On the north and east benches, the houses sometimes climb as far as halfway up the mountain, and new communities are also being constructed on the steeper southern and western slopes. Rapid residential construction continues in the west-central, southwest, and southern portions of the valley. In the far west, southwest, and northwest, rural areas still exist, but rapid growth threatens what remains of the natural environment in the valley.Adjacent counties* Tooele County - west* Utah County - south* Wasatch County - southeast* Summit County - east* Morgan County - northeast* Davis County - northClimateThe Salt Lake Valley receives, on average, approximately 15 inches (380 mm) of precipitation annually, usually with more on the east side and less on the west side, as most storms come from the Ocean. This leaves much of the west side in the rain shadow of the Mountains. Up to 20 inches (500 mm) is received on the benches. Most of this precipitation is received in spring. The summer is dry, with the majority of precipitation arriving from the monsoon that rises from the south. Short, localized, and often dry thunderstorms are usually associated with the monsoon. However, some of them can be very intense. These storms can also cause floods and wildfires (due to dry lightning and powerful winds). Precipitation is heaviest in late fall/early winter and in spring, while early summer is the driest season.The valley receives 55 inches (140 cm) or more of snow in a year, with up to 100 inches (250 cm) received on the benches. Most of the snow falls from mid-November through March. The mountains receive up to 500 inches (1,270 cm) of light, dry snow and up to 55 inches (1400 mm) of precipitation annually. The dry snow is often considered good for skiing, contributing to the four ski resorts in the county. Snow usually falls from October through May. The heavy snow totals across the county can be attributed to the lake-effect, where precipitation is intensified by the warm waters of the Great Salt Lake, which never entirely freezes due to the lakes high salinity. The lake-effect can affect any area of the county. The dry snow is attributed to the low humidity of the region.During winter, inversions are a common problem. The inversion will trap pollutants, moisture, and cold temperatures in the valley while the surrounding mountains enjoy warm temperatures and brilliant sunshine. This can cause some melting snow in the mountains and unhealthy air quality and low visibility in the valley. This weather event lasts from a few days to up to a month in extreme cases, and is caused by a very strong high pressure positioned over the Basin. Demographics As of the census of 2010, there were 1,029,655 people, 343,218 households, and 291,686 families residing in the county.  The density was 1,274 people per square mile (791/km).  There were 364,031 housing units at an average density of 450 per square mile (279/km).  The racial makeup of the county was 81.2% White, 1.59% Black or African American, 0.89% Native American, 3.3% Asian, 1.53% Pacific Islander, 8.35% from other races, and 3.14% from two or more races.  17.09% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.By 2007 Non-Hispanic whites were 76.5% of Salt Lake Countys population and Latinos were 15.7% of the population. African-Americans were 1.7% of the population.  Asians were 3% of the population, while Pacific Islanders were 1.3%.  Native Americans were still 1% of the population.(Salt Lake County QuickFacts from the US Census Bureau)  The Census 2005 American Community Survey indicated that 11.4% of Salt Lake Countys population living in households (as opposed to group arrangements such as college dormitories) spoke Spanish at home.In 2010 there were 343,218 households out of which 40.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.80% were married couples living together, 10.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.50% were non-families.  20.80% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 3.00 and the average family size was 3.53.In the county, the population was spread out with 30.50% under the age of 18, 12.90% from 18 to 24, 30.60% from 25 to 44, 18.00% from 45 to 64, and 8.10% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 29 years.  For every 100 females there were 101.70 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.70 males.The median income for a household in the county was $48,373, and the median income for a family was $54,470. Males had a median income of $36,953 versus $26,105 for females. The capita income for the county was $20,190.  About 5.70% of families and 8.00% of the population were below the line, including 9.00% of those under age 18 and 5.50% of those age 65 or over.By 2009 the county population had risen to 1,034,989, or 15.2% since 2000. This was a rise below the rate for the state overall; however, Utah was the 2nd fastest growing state (after Wyoming)in 2009 according to the U.S. Census Bureau.(Source: http://www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/releases/archives/population/014509.html)History19th centuryThe area that was to become Salt Lake County was settled in 1847 when pioneers of Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), fleeing persecution in the East, arrived in the Lake Valley after traveling through Canyon. Young, their leader, declared This is the place after seeing the valley, which was at the time arid, dry, and unpromising. However, they soon developed a flourishing, self-sufficient city, Great Salt Lake City, through extensive irrigation techniques. Thousands of Mormons from around the world followed in the next several decades. The county was officially formed on January 31, 1850, with just over 11,000 residents recorded.()Settlements were scattered across the valley and beyond, and the territorial capital was moved to Great Salt Lake City in 1857, when the name was subsequently shortened to Salt Lake City. In 1858, when the Territory was declared in rebellion after governor Brigham Young refused to step down for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints polygamous practices, the government sent troops to install a new governor and keep watch over the place. However, the valley was abandoned and the troops set up Floyd to the south in Utah County. In 1862, Fort Douglas was established on the eastern bench, near the current site of the of Utah, to make sure that the territory maintained its allegiance during the Civil War.Edward Connor, who was the leader of the garrison stationed at Fort Douglas, was openly anti-Mormon and sent out parties to scout for mineral resources in the nearby mountains to encourage non-Mormons to settle there. During the late 19th century, mines were established in the mountains, most notably around Alta. Exploiting the mineral wealth was difficult until the Utah Central Railroad arrived in 1870. The Canyon Mine, which contains vast deposits of copper and silver, was the most notable of the mines that was established. The mine, located in the Mountains in the southwest portion of the county, attracted thousands of settlers to the narrow canyon. At its peak, the city of Bingham Canyon contained 20,000 residents all crowded along the steep walls of the canyon, and natural disasters were a frequent occurrence. By the early 20th century, most of the mines in the county had closed. However, the Bingham Canyon Mine kept on expanding, and today is among the largest open-pit mines in the world.20th centuryAfter the railroad came to the county, the population began to expand more rapidly and non-Mormons began to settle in the city. During the early 20th century, heavy industry came to the valley as well, diversifying its economy, and a trolley system was in place in what are now Salt Lake City and South Salt Lake. The trolley system was mostly dismantled by 1945 as cars outpaced transportation across the country. Throughout the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the east side of the valley began to be heavily-settled. In 1942, Kearns, a massive military installation created for War II, was created in what is now Kearns and Taylorsville on the western side of the valley. After the camp was closed in 1946, the land was sold off and rapid settlement of the area began. Other major defensive installations were set up along the Front and in the Salt Lake Desert during World War II, further encouraging growth and boosting the economy, as well as establishing Utah as a major military center. In the nation-wide suburb boom of the late 1940s, 1950s, and early 1960s, such cities as South Salt Lake, Murray, Midvale, and much of the east side of the valley grew rapidly.The airport was upgraded to international status in the 1960s and became Lake City International Airport. Like all of the industrialized cities throughout the nation, Salt Lake City faced inner-city decay beginning especially in the 1960s, while the suburbs grew tremendously. Growth in such cities as Sandy, West Jordan, and what would become West Valley City was phenomenal in the 1970s and 1980s. Huge residential tracts were created through the center of the valley, and within ten years, the entire area had been converted from farmland into sprawling bedroom communities to Salt Lake City. Valley City was created from the merger of the three unincorporated cities of Granger, Hunter, and Chesterfield in 1980. However, not every area of the county saw growth. Not only was Salt Lake City facing urban decay, but the cities that provided residences for the miners in Bingham Canyon were torn down in the 1960s and 1970s. The city of Bingham Canyon was completely torn down and swallowed up in the mine by 1972, and the dismantling of Lark in 1980 completed the process. The only remaining mining town in the county is Copperton, located southwest of West Jordan, with approximately 800 residents.Beginning especially in the 1990s, rapid growth shifted further south and west. Old farmland and pastureland was swallowed up by new residential development. The cities of West Jordan, South Jordan, Riverton, Herriman, and Draper are some of the fastest growing cities in the state. During the 1990s, Salt Lake City began reversing the trend of inner-city decay, and its population grew for the first time in 40 years. Salt Lake Citys selection as the host of the 2002 Winter Olympics spurred a construction boom in the city that continued well after the Olympics left, until a recession began in 2008. As the countys population has surpassed 1 million, one of the main issues in the county is urbanization. Only a few small rural areas remain in the far west of the valley. Other issues facing the county today include pollution and transportation.According to data from the LDS Church and the State of Utah, Salt Lake County was 53% LDS (Mormon) in 2004, as reported in the Salt Lake Tribune.(See: http://extras.mnginteractive.com/live/media/site297/2005/0726/20050726_101404_DTTTRB24A10.PDF)(http://www.udot.utah.gov/slcountyeastwest/downloads/trib_111607.pdf) Extrapolating corresponding figures of 62% LDS in 1994 and 57% in 1999, along with the 2004 figure of 53%, renders an estimate that Lake County is very likely less than 50% LDS today. EconomyThe regions economy used to revolve around LDS services and mining. While both are still important to the economy, they have declined in significance greatly since the 19th century. Since War II, defense industries in the region have also played a very important role in the economy due to its strategic central location in the United States, as well as the largely uninhabited and desolate Salt Lake Desert to the west.Beginning in 1939, with the opening of Ski Area, skiing and other winter sports (as well as summer sports), have become a major force in the economy. In 1995, Salt Lake City won the bid to host the Winter Olympics. The 2002 Olympics boosted tourism and the economy, and helped to dramatically improve transportation throughout the county.  Transportation has been a major focus, as the county continues to rapidly grow in population. It was drastically improved beginning in the late 80s and through the 90s, and continues to this day. Beginning in the 1960s, a more service-oriented economy began to develop, and information technologies began to arrive in the 80s and 90s. Although this business has waned in recent years, information and computer companies, such as Overstock.com, are still a thriving business here.Law and government/PoliticsImage:Salt lake city county building.jpg|thumb|right|Lake City and County Building circa 1923Salt Lake County is unique in that it has a partisan mayor. The current county mayor is Corroon, a Democrat. Former county mayors include Workman and Dayton (Workmans deputy mayor; Sworn in as acting mayor in September 2004 when Nancy Workman was placed on paid administrative leave).County councilBesides a mayor, Salt Lake County also has a council. Members include three elected at-large and six elected by district. Council members from districts serve four-year staggered terms in partisan elections while at-large members serve six years.At-large council members*Randy Horiuchi*Jenny Wilson*Jim BradleyDistrict council members*Arlyn Bradshaw &mdash; 1st district (council chairman)Arlyn Bradshaw elected to replace Hatch*Michael Jensen &mdash; 2nd district*David Wilde &mdash; 3rd district*Jani Iwamoto &mdash; 4th district (council chairman)*Jeff Allen &mdash; 5th district*Max Burdick &mdash; 6th districtPoliticsSalt Lake County usually favors candidates from the Republican Party, especially in state and federal elections. In 2004, Republican President W. Bush won the county over Democrat Kerry 59% to 37%. In 2008, however, Democrat Obama won Salt Lake County by an extremely narrow margin, 48.17% to 48.09, over Republican McCain - a difference of 296 votes.(http://uselectionatlas.org/RESULTS/statesub.php?year2008&fips49035&f0&off0&elect0) It was the first time since 1964, when B. Johnson was the Democratic candidate, that Salt Lake County had voted for a Democrat.EducationSalt Lake County includes five separate public school districts. Salt Lake City and Murray operate their own school districts (although a recent annexation by Murray leaves a part of the city within the Granite School District). The School District, the largest in the state, is a broad district that covers a swath from Kearns and Taylorsville through Valley City, Utah and eastward to South Salt Lake and Township, among others. The School District, with approximately 48,000 students, covers the southwest part of the county, including West Jordan; the new Canyons School District includes Sandy, and Draper. On November 6, 2007, the east side residents of the Jordan School District in Sandy, Draper, Midvale, Cottonwood Heights, and nearby unincorporated areas, voted to split from the Jordan District. A similar vote to make West Jordan its own district, however, failed.() Two high schools have closed:*South High School in Salt Lake City closed in 1988; it is now occupied by the City Campus of the Lake Community College (SLCC).*Granite High School in South Salt Lake was reformed into an alternative school in 2006, although it remains a public school. However, this venture was not a financial success and the school closed in 2009.In addition, the Catholic Diocese of Salt Lake City operates 8 elementary schools, 1 middle school, 2 high schools, and 2 preschools in Salt Lake County. Memorial Catholic High School in Salt Lake City is the largest Catholic high school in Utah. The Catholic Church also operates Juan Diego High School in Draper.Salt Lake County also has several independent schools including:*Hall-St. Marks School*Waterford SchoolNational protected area*National Forest (part)TransportationThe county is traversed by three Highways and one Highway, as well as an additional freeway and one major road|expressway. US-89 enters from Davis County to the north and traverses the county arrow-straight until merging with I-15 in north Draper. It is known as State Street along most of the route and is the primary surface road in the valley. I-15 and I-80 intersect just west of Salt Lake City, merging for approximately  north-to-south. I-80 continues west past the Lake City International Airport and east through Canyon and into the Range. I-15 traverses the valley north-to-south, providing access to the entire urban corridor. The freeway is 10-12 lanes wide after a major expansion project from 1998 to 2001 undertaken in preparation for the Winter Olympics. I-215 directly serves many of the suburbs of Salt Lake City in the western, central, and eastern portions of the valley in a 270 loop. SR-201, alternatively known as the 21st South Freeway, provides access to West Valley City and the west side of the valley. Bangerter Highway (SR-154) is an expressway that traverses the entire western end of the valley from the airport, ending at I-15 in southern Draper. SR-68, or Redwood Road, is the only surface street that traverses the entire valley from north-to-south.A rail system, known as TRAX, is operated by the Transit Authority (UTA) and runs from the Salt Lake Central Station in downtown Salt Lake City south to Sandy, with another line east to the of Utah; the system currently has 28 stops. Extensions to the airport, West Valley City, and South Jordan are under construction and another to Draper has been approved, with completion of all four expected by 2014. A rail line, FrontRunner, began operation in April 2008 between the Salt Lake Central Station in downtown Salt lake City and Pleasant View. An extension south to Provo is under construction and is expected to be complete by 2012. UTA also operates bus routes to nearly every location in the valley and routes to the ski resorts in winter. The Parkway opened in 2008 to connect with I-215 at the north end of the valley, providing an alternative route into Davis County to alleviate congestion. The View Corridor is a freeway planned to be constructed down the far west side of the valley. A historic streetcar is also being considered along 2100 South from the TRAX station to the historic business district in the Sugar House neighborhood.()Cities and townCurrentAt present there are 15 cities and one town (Alta) in the county:*Alta, incorporated in 1970*Bluffdale, incorporated in 1978*Cottonwood Heights, incorporated in 2005*Draper, incorporated in 1978*Herriman, incorporated in 1999*Holladay, incorporated in 1999*Midvale, incorporated in 1900s*Murray, incorporated in 1902*Riverton, incorporated in 1946*Salt Lake City, incorporated in 1851*Sandy, incorporated in 1893*South Jordan, incorporated in 1935*South Salt Lake, incorporated in 1938*Taylorsville, incorporated in 1996*West Jordan, incorporated in 1941*West Valley City, incorporated in 1980Former* Bingham Canyon, incorporated 1904, disincorporated 1971. The last buildings were razed in 1972 as the Canyon Mine absorbed the town. At its peak its population was around 15,000.* Forest Dale, incorporated 1902, disincorporated 1912 and reabsorbed into Salt Lake City.(Microsoft PowerPoint - Forest Dale National Register Historic District January 22, 2009 Presentation)* Lark was a small town on the southwest side of the valley that was dismantled entirely in 1978 to make way for overburden from the Bingham Canyon Mine. At its peak its population was around 800.Unincorporated communitiesThe county has created townships and community councils in unincorporated areas, largely for planning purposes only. As of 2010, all of the townships are also places (CDPs), but the boundaries set by the Bureau and the county do not always coincide.Townships: *Copperton*Canyon*Kearns*Magna*Millcreek*White CityCommunity Councils:*Cottonwood Canyon*Granite (also a CDP)*Canyon*Sandy Hills and Willow Canyon (enclaves of Sandy)*Southwest (area south of Copperton and South Jordan and west of Herriman)See also*Register of Historic Places listings in Salt Lake County, UtahPeople* Parker Christensen, Utah and California politician. County attorney.NotesReferences* Stilltoe, Linda (1996). A History of Salt Lake County. Salt Lake City: Utah Historical Society. ISBN 0-913738-04-2* Utah Catholic SchoolsExternal links*Salt Lake County Online  Lake Countyde Salt Lakede Salt Lake , di Salt LakeLake ComitatusLake CountyLake County Lake CountySalt Lakede Salt LakeLake County(, )Salt Lake, Utahzh:
72735
Cusco
|Latin America and the Caribbean|website                 www.municusco.gob.pe}}|}Cusco (), often spelled Cuzco (,  or ; , ), is a city in southeastern Peru, near the Urubamba Valley of the Andes mountain range. It is the capital of the Region as well as the Province. In 2007, the city had a population of 358,935 which was triple the figure of 20 years ago. Located on the eastern end of the Knot of Cuzco, its elevation is around .Cusco was the site of the historic capital of the Empire and was declared a Heritage Site in 1983 by UNESCO. It is a major tourist destination and receives almost 2 million visitors a year. It is designated as the Historical Capital of Peru by the of Peru.()Spelling and etymologyThe aboriginal name of this city was Qusqu.  Although it was used in Quechua, its origin has been found in the Aymara language.  The word itself originated in the phrase qusqu wanka (Rock of the owl), attending to the foundational myth of the Ayar Siblings.  According to this legend, Ayar Auca (Ayar Awqa) got wings and flew to the site of the future city and transformed into a rock to mark the possession of the land by his ayllu (linage).()The Spanish conquistadors adopted the local name, transliterating it into Spanish as Cuzco or less often Cozco.  Cuzco was the standard spelling on official documents and chronicles at the colonial epoch.()In 1976, the City Mayor of Cuzco signed an ordinance banning the traditional spelling and ordering the use of a new one, Cusco, in the municipality publications.  Nineteen years later, in 23 June 1990, the local authorities officialized a brand new spelling instead: Qosqo.In English, both s()() and z()() are accepted, as there is no international official spelling.(of words in English) The Britannica uses Cuzco.HistoryKillke cultureThe Killke occupied the region from 900 to 1200, prior to the arrival of the Incas in the 13th century.  Carbon-14 dating of Sacsayhuaman, the walled complex outside Cusco, has demonstrated that the Killke culture constructed the fortress about 1100.  The Inca later expanded and occupied the complex in the 13th century and after.  On 13 March 2008, archaeologists discovered the ruins of an ancient temple, roadway and acqueduct system at Sacsayhuaman.(Kelly Hearn, Ancient Temple Discovered Among Inca Ruins, National Geographic News, 31 March 2008, accessed 12 January 2010)  This find plus the results of excavations in 2007, when another temple was found at the edge of the fortress, indicates religious as well as military use of the facility.({{cite web|urlhttp://www.comcast.net/news/index.jsp?catGENERAL&fn/2008/03/14/911994.html&cookieattempt1 |titleNEWS - Comcast.net |publisherComcast.netMain sightsDcembre 2006 - Vue Panoramique - Pleine rsolution.jpg|thumb|center|810px|centre|Ruins of Sacsayhuamn.Although the original Inca city was said to have been founded in the 11th century, more recently scholars have established that Inca did not occupy the area until after 1200 AD.  Before them the indigenous people of the culture built the walled complex of Sacsayhuaman about 1100 AD.  In November 2008, archeological researchers found that the Killke also built a major temple near Sacsayhuaman, as well as an acqueduct and roadway connecting prehistoric structures.The Spanish explorer Pizarro sacked much of the Inca city in 1535.  Remains of the palace of the Incas, the Temple of the Sun, and the Temple of the Virgins of the Sun still stand.  In addition, Inca buildings and foundations in some cases have proved to be stronger than the foundations built in present-day Peru.  Among the most noteworthy Spanish colonial buildings of the city is the of Santo Domingo, Cusco.The major nearby Inca sites are Pachacutis presumed winter home, Picchu, which can be reached on foot by an Inca trail or by train; and the fortress at Ollantaytambo.  Sacsayhuaman was expanded by the Inca.Less-visited ruins include: Wasi, the highest of all Inca sites at ; Old Vilcabamba the capital of the Inca after the capture of Cuzco; the garden at Chulquipalta (aka Chuquipalta, usta Espaa, The White Rock, Yurak Rumi); Tipn with working water channels in wide terraces; as well as Raccay, Patallacta, Choquequirao, Moray and many others.The surrounding area, located in the Huatanay Valley, is strong in gold mining and agriculture, including corn, barley, quinoa, tea and coffee.Thanks to remodelling, Cuscos main stadium Garcilaso de la Vega attracted more tourists during South Americas continental soccer championship, the Amrica 2004 held in Peru.  The stadium is home to one of the countrys most successful soccer clubs, Cienciano. Cuzcos local team has built a reputation in the world of club soccer, as it has won several international competitions in South America.  It has yet to achieve such success in its home country.The city is served by Velasco Astete International Airport. Architectural heritage Because of its antiquity and importance, the center of the city retains many buildings, plazas and streets of pre-Columbian times and colonial buildings, which led to his being declared a Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1983. Among the main sights of the city are: Barrio de San Blas This neighborhood housing artisans, workshops and craft shops, is one of the most picturesque sites in the city. Its streets are steep and narrow with old houses built by the Spanish over important Inca foundations. It has an attractive square and the oldest parish church in Cuzco, built in 1563, which has a carved wooden pulpit considered the epitome of Colonial era woodwork in Cuzco.The Quechua name of this neighborhood is Toqocachi which means the opening of the Salt Calle Hatun Rumiyuq This street is the most visited by tourists. On the street Hatun Rumiyoq (Of the Old Rock) was the palace of Roca, which was converted to the Archbishops residence.Along this street that runs from the Plaza de Armas to the Barrio de San Blas, one can see the Stone of Twelve Angles, which is viewed as marvel of ancient stonework and has become emblematic of the citys history. Convent and Church of la Merced Its foundation dates from 1536. The first complex was destroyed by the earthquake of 1650 and the rebuilding of the church and convent was completed in 1675.Its cloisters of Baroque Renaissance style, choir stalls, colonial paintings and wood carvings are highlights of a visit to this church, now a popular museum and tourist attraction.Also on view is an elaborate monstrance made of gold and gemstones which weighs 22 kilos and is  in height. Cathedral The first cathedral built in Cuzco is the Iglesia del Triunfo, built in 1539 on the foundations of the Palace of Viracocha Inca. Today, this church is an auxiliary chapel of the Cathedral.The main basilica cathedral of the citywas built between 1560 and 1664. Stone was used as the main material, which was extracted from nearby quarries, although some blocks of red granite were taken from the fortress known as Sacsayhuamn.This great cathedral, of Renaissance plan interior presents late-Gothic, Baroque and plateresque interiors, and has one of the most outstanding examples of colonial goldwork. Its carved wooden altars are also important.The city developed a distinctive style of painting known as the School, and the cathedral houses a major collection of local artists of the time. The cathedral is the seat of the Archdiocese of Cuzco. Plaza de Armas Known as the Square of the warrior in the Inca era, this plaza has been the scene of several important events in the history of this city, such as the proclamation by Pizarro in the conquest of Cuzco.Similarly, the Plaza de Armas was the scene of the death of Amaru II, considered the indigenous leader of the resistance.The Spanish built stone arcades around the plaza which endure to this day. The main cathedral and the Church of La Compaa both open directly onto the plaza. Church of la Compaa This church, whose construction was initiated by the Jesuits in 1576 on the foundations of the Amarucancha or the palace of the Inca Capac, is considered one of the best examples of colonial baroque style on the American continents.Its faade is carved in stone and its main altar is made of carved wood covered with gold leaf. It was built over an underground chapel. This church has a valuable collection of colonial paintings of the Cusco School. Coricancha and Convent of Santo Domingo The Coricancha (Quri Kancha) was the most important sanctuary dedicated to the Sun god Inti at the time of the Empire. This temple was named the site of gold because all its walls were covered with gold leaf by the Incas.With this structure as a foundation, colonists built the Convent of Santo Domingo, in the Renaissance style. The building, with one baroque tower, exceeds the height of many other buildings in this city.Inside is a large collection of paintings from the School.PopulationUntil the late 18th century Cusco was the most populous city in the continent, even more than Lima. But because of the great revolution of Amaru II in 1780, the white population migrated to Arequipa, considered safer from a possible new uprising. So, until the 20th century, the population was largely mestizo and indigenous, but now the white population has grown significantly in the city as high as 30%, as it is experiencing a explosion process led by the tourism boom.The city has a population of 390,000 people by 2008 according to INEI.File:Cusco-c02.jpg|thumb|300px|View of the city from Sacsayhuamn. Roofs of Colonial architecture.{||-| valigntop || valigntop ||}Population of the cityThe city of Cuzco is composed of five districts::* Cuzco.:* San Jernimo.:* San Sebastian.:* Santiago.:* Wanchaq.FoodAs headquarters to the Inca Empire, Cuzco was an important agricultural region.  It was a natural reserve for thousands of native Peruvian species, including around 2,000 varieties of potato cultivated by the people.() Recently many fusion and neo-Andean restaurants have developed in Cuzco, in which the cuisine is prepared with modern techniques and incorporates a blend of traditional Andean and international ingredients.(Guide to Peruvian Food, Cusco Reference)Also, a cacao and chocolate museum, ChocoMuseo, recently opened in the center of the city. The purpose of this place is to teach people about Peruvian cacao and also the whole process to make artisanal chocolate. .Industry*Cusquea breweryInternational relationsTwin townsSister citiesCuzco is twinned with:()Partnerships*  Krakw in Poland()GalleryFile:Cathdrale de Cuzco Dcembre 2007 - Vue de Face.jpg|of Santo Domingo, CuscoFile:Iglesia-La-Compania---Cuzco.jpg|The Church of La Compaia on the Plaza de ArmasFile:CuscoPiedra12angulo.jpg|12-sided stoneFile:Cusco-catedral-c01.jpg|Chapel of the Holy Family / Capilla de la Sagrada FamiliaFile:Centro del cuzco.jpg|Old streets in the centerFile:Cuzco Dcembre 2007 - Panorama 1.jpg|Panorama of Cusco, PeruFile:CristoBlanco.jpg|CristoBlancoIn modern culture*In the childrens movie Emperors New Groove and its spin-off animated television series Emperors New School, the main protagonist is Kuzco, the young, often immature fictional emperor of the Incas.*Cuzco was the name of a song on Posthumus 2001 album Unearthed. Each song on the album was named after an ancient city.*The Horowitz novel Evil Star takes places partly in Cusco.*Cuzco is the city where the legendary radio presenter Peel died whilst on a working holiday.See also*road system*of New Castile*School*tourist information and assistance*in Peru*of archaeoastronomical sites sorted by country* PeruRail*Pambokancha, Inca religious siteReferences;NotesExternal links*Bibliography about Cuzco *Government Site *Government Cultural Site *http://www.regioncusco.gob.pe/2.0/ Government site about Cusco Region *PromPer: Government Tourism Site on Cusco*General facts and travel information about Cusco*General information and basic factsaf:Cuscoar:an:Cuzcoast:Cuscogn:Cuscoay:Qusqubn:bg:ca:Cuscocs:Cuzcocy:Cuzcoda:Cuscode:Cuscoel:es:Cuzcoeo:Kuskoeu:Cuscofa:fr:Cuzcoga:Cuscoko:hi:hr:Cuscoid:Cuscoos:it:Cuzcohe:jv:Cuscoka:la:Cuscumlt:Kuskaslij:Cuscohu:Cuzcomk:ms:Cusconah:Cuzco(stad)ja:no:Cuzconn:Cuzcooc:Cuscopl:Cuzcopt:Cuscoro:Cuzcoqu:Qusquru:sco:Cuscosimple:Cusco(mesto)sl:Cuscosr:fi:Cuscosv:Cuscota:th:tr:Cuscouk:vo:Cuscowar:Cuscozh:
73106
Mount_Pleasant_Cemetery,_Toronto
Mount Pleasant Cemetery is a cemetery located in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.In the early 19th century, the only authorized cemeteries within the city of Toronto (then known as York) were limited to the members of either the Catholic Church or the of England. Deceased citizens who did not belong to either of these Christian denominations had no choice but to find burial arrangements outside of the city. In 1873, a new cemetery available to all citizens was conceived. Originally a  farm, on the far outskirts of Toronto, Mount Pleasant Cemetery opened on November 4, 1876 with more than twelve miles (19 km) of carriage drives along rolling hills and ponds. Pleasant Road was later constructed to pass through the centre of the cemetery and is named after this cemetery. With the growth in population, today the cemetery is located in the centre of the city. While the watercourses have since been filled in, the cemetery still has many miles of walking paths, interspersed with fountains, statues, botanical gardens, and rare and distinct trees.As the final resting place of more than 168,000 persons, Mount Pleasant Cemetery contains remarkable architecture amongst its many monuments. The cemetery was designated a National Historic Site of Canada in 2000.(Mount Pleasant Cemetery,  Directory of Designations of National Historic Significance of Canada)(Mount Pleasant Cemetery, National Register of Historic Places)Mount Pleasant Visitation Centrethumb|270px|right|Visitation CentreCompleted in the Fall of 2009, the Mount Pleasant Visitation Centre is a new building built on the cemetery grounds designed to provide visitation space, chapel services, and reception space. The brick building is approximately 2,200 square meters in total size, with an outdoor 80 car parking lot.(http://www.visitationcentre.ca/MP_new-visit.html Accessed October 2nd, 2009)The cemetery began planning the building as early as 2004, but disputes with the City of Toronto, local ratepayer associations, and the Municipal Board all delayed the project. Changes were made as a result of this process, most notably vehicle access is now through the cemetery grounds only, not directly from Moore Avenue.(http://www.visitationcentre.ca/MP_design.html Accessed October 2nd, 2009)(http://www.moorepark.org/ Accessed October 2nd, 2009) Notable interments Veterans* William George Billy Barker, VC, DSO & Bar, MC & Two Bars (18941930), LCOL, 201 Squadron, RAF. World War I flying ace, Victoria Cross recipient* George Fraser Kerr, VC, MC & Bar, MM (18951929), CAPT, 3rd battalion (Toronto) Central Ontario Regiment, CEF. World War I Victoria Cross recipientTitanic* Godfrey Peuchen Lieutenant-Colonel (April 18, 1859  December 7, 1929) was a Canadian businessman and RMS Titanic survivor. He was also a WWI veteran.Medicine Personalities* Banting (18911941)  &  Charles Best (18991978), co-discoverers of insulin * Harmer (18801934), prominent Canadian/American nurse* Smillie Robertson (18781981), Canadas first female surgeonMusic Personalities* Gimby (19181998) Writer of the 67 theme: Ca-na-da* Gould (19321982), musician, pianist, composer, musical theorist* Heintzman, & Co. piano manufacturer* Muir (18301906), author of Maple Leaf Forever (1867), Canadas early (unofficial) National Anthem* Mulgrew, Core Logo lead singer and frontman (Fictional Character)BusinesspeopleImage:Aaa massy.jpg|thumb|270px|The Family crypt, designed by Lennox in the Romanesque Revival style.* Ernest Ames (18671934), stockbroker, founder of A.E. Ames & Co.* J. Billes (19021995), cofounder of Tire* Montegu Black II (19111976), president of Breweries* James Boylen (19071970) mining magnate, racehorse owner* Albertus Cox (18401914), businessman, Senator* T. Davies (18491916), businessman, racehorse owner* Eaton (18341907), department store magnate* Henry Gundy (18801951), stockbroker, co-founder of Gundy Inc.* Henry R. Jackman (1900-1979), businessman and politician, father of Governor Henry N.R. Jackman* Edward Kemp (18581929), businessman and politician* Massey (18231896), businessman* McMaster (18111887), banker, statesman, a founder of McMaster University* H. New (18881979), businessman, racehorse owner* Nicholls (businessman) (18561921), businessman, founded the first electric power company in Canada* Godfrey Peuchen (1859-1929), businessman, soldier; survivor of Titanic* S. Rogers, Sr. (19001939), founder of Rogers Communications* Alexander Russell (18771940), automobile manufacturer* Stavro (19282006), businessman, horse breeder, former owner of the Maple Leafs* Shepard II, businessman* Robert Simpson (18341897), department store magnate* Thomson, 2nd Baron Thomson of Fleet (1923  2006), businessman, art collector, richest person in Canada* Weston (18641924), businessman, founder of Weston Limited* Garfield Weston (18981978), businessmanPoliticians* Cox Aikins (18231904), politician* Henry Ball (18631943), politician and Printer* G. Gardiner (18951983), politician* Lyon Mackenzie King (18741950), Prime Minister of Canada* Ryerson (18031882), minister, educator, politician, and public education advocate* Sifton, politician* Dean Summerville, Mayor of Toronto* Summerville, Toronto City Alderman, Board of Control, MPP* P. Whidden, clergyman, Parliamentarian, Chancellor of University Premiers of Ontario:* Howard Ferguson (18701946)* William Hearst (18641941)* Stewart Henry (18711958)* Sir Oliver Mowat (18201903), also considered a Father of Canadian Confederation* William Ross (18411914)Lieutenant Governors of Ontario:* Alexander Bruce (18681963), surgeon* Mortimer Clark (1936-1917), lawyer* Herbert Clarke (18591921), brewer* Keiller MacKay (18881970), lawyer, judge* Edward Matthews (18731949), brokerMayors of Toronto:* McBride (18661936), lumber merchant* Robert John Fleming (18541925), businessman* Kennedy (18271904), businessman* Hood Saunders (19031955), lawyer* Thomas Urquhart (18581931), lawyer* Lamport (19031999), Transit Commission CommissionerClergymen* Arnold Brown (19132002), General of The Salvation Army * Goforth (18591936), Presbyterian MissionarySports Personalities* Burch (19001950), Hall of Fame ice-hockey player* Conacher (19091967), Hall of Fame ice hockey player* Imlach (19181987), hockey player and coach* Irvin (18921957), Hall of Fame ice-hockey player and coach* Knudson  (19371989), Tour golfer* Korolev (1970-2011), hockey player* George Lyon (18581938), Olympic Gold Medal golfer* Zock (19181988), Hall of Fame CFL football playerOther* James Bain (18421908), first chief librarian of the Public Library* Child (18971960), painter, etcher and illustrator at the Telegram* Fred Davis (19211996), popular television host* Frye (19121991), educator, literary critic* Hewitt (19021985), broadcaster File:Hewitt family tombstone.jpg|thumb|Hewitts grave* Muntz Lyall (18601930), artist * David Milne (1882-1953), artist* W. Micklethwaite (18491925), prominent photographer* A. Pearson, architect from the firm and Darling* Sutherland (c.1830-1878), Canadas first black lawyer, and an important benefactor and alumnus of UniversityReferences*Official web site*Filey, Mike Mount Pleasant Cemetery (1990) Books ISBN 0-920668-69-0External links*Official web site*Location of the cemetery with additional photos, videos, and related websitesMount Pleasant  
74605
Rybnik
 website  http://www.rybnik.pl/  Rybnik  is a city in southern Poland, in the Voivodeship. Rybnik is located close to the border with the Republic and just outside the southern border of the largest urban area in Poland, the Silesian Metropolitan Union. Rybnik is about 290 km south of Warsaw and about 100 km west of Krakw.The city of Rybnik has a population of about 141,387 (June 2009), and its metropolitan area is 0.7 million. The Rybnik area is an important economic region of Poland, and visible center of culture, with a famous Brothers State School of Music and Philharmonic Orchestra.Population and locationThe city itself has 141,387 inhabitants (including 0.03% foreigners); its density is 955.3 per km (as of 30 June 2009). Rybnik ranks as Polands 25th largest city. Rybniks unemployment is significantly lower (4.6%) than the national average of 8.8% (as of October 2008). Ethnically, 88% of Rybniks population declare themselves as Poles, 9% as Silesians and 3% as others.DistrictsRybnik is a powiat (county) divided into 27 districts that have its own administrative body. Most of the districts are subarbian, some are densely built with many blocks of flats generating huge housing estates e.g. Maroko-Nowiny, and the rest are of civic nature Smolna, rdmiecie, Pnoc i Paruszowiec as there are a lot of houses.* 1. Osiedle* 2. Stare* 3. Chwaowice* 4. Chwacice* 5. Golejw* 6. Gotartowice* 7. Grabownia* 8. Kamie* 9. Kokocin* 10. Ligota  Ligocka Kunia* 11. Meksyk* 12. Niedobczyce* 13. Niewiadom* 14. Maroko-Nowiny* 15. Ochojec* 16. Orzepowice* 17. Paruszowiec-Piaski* 18. Popielw* 19. Radziejw* 20. Rybnicka Kunia* 21. Rybnik  Pnoc* 22. Smolna* 23. rdmiecie* 24. Stodoy* 25. Wielopole* 26. Zamysw* 27. ZebrzydowiceThe city of Rybnik is the centre of a area, the Coal Region () with a population of 0.7 million. The distance to Katowice is about 50 km, and to Ostrava is about 30 km.HistoryThe citys name derives from the Polish word for fish (ryba) and meant fishpond in the Old language. (In Romany, rebniko means fishpond to this day). The name highlights the importance of farming for the citys economy in the Ages, which is reflected in its of arms until this day.The citys origins can be traced back into the 9th and 10th century, when three Slavic settlements existed on Rybniks present-day territory which eventually merged to form one town. In the course of the medieval eastward migration of German settlers (Ostsiedlung), Rybnik, as many other Polish settlements, was incorporated (granted city status and right) according to the so-called Law at some point before 1308 (the exact date remains unknown). This, however, is not to be confused with a change in national affiliation; Rybnik continued to be part of the Kingdom of Poland, until Silesia as a whole became a fiefdom of the Bohemian crown in 1327. The city continued to grow and developed into a regional trade centre. In the 15th century, the Hussites devastated the city, before being eventually defeated in a decisive battle on a hill nearby. From 1526, Bohemia, including the fiefdom of Silesia, which Rybnik was a part of, came under the authority of the Habsburg crown.At the beginning of the of the Austrian Succession between II of Prussia (the Great) and the Habsburg empress Theresa of Austria, the greatest part of Silesia, including Rybnik, was annexed by Prussia in 1740, which Austria eventually recognized in 1763. Coal mining gained importance for Rybniks economy as early as the 18th century. In 1871, Prussia, including Rybnik, merged into the Empire, the first modern German nation state. At this point, Poland had already ceased to exist as an independent state, having been divided between Prussia, Austria and Russia in the Third Partition of Poland of 1795.With the intensification of Germanization and anti-Polish politics in the German Empire in the late 19th and early 20th century, the ethnically mixed region of Silesia became affected by growing tensions between German and Polish nationalists. After the end of World War I in 1918, Polish statehood was finally restored. Amidst an atmosphere of ethnic unrest, a referendum was organized to determine the future national affiliation of Silesia. Although an overall majority had opted for Germany, the area was finally divided in an attempt to satisfy both parties. Although both parties considered the territory they were assigned insufficient, the division was justified insofar as in the German and Polish parts a majority had voted in favour of the respective nation.The lowest amount of pro-German votes was registered in the districts of Rybnik and Pszczyna (Pless). The city and the largest part of the district of Rybnik were attached to Poland; Rybnik thus became part of a Polish state for the first time since 1526. The referendum and eventual division of Upper Silesia were accompanied by three Uprisings, the first of which (in 1919) was centered on Rybnik.Within the Polish Republic of the interwar period, Rybnik was part of the Silesian Voivodeship, which enjoyed far-reaching political and financial autonomy.With the outbreak of World War II in 1939, the border city Rybnik returned under the rule of Germany, being in the part of Poland that was directly incorporated into the German state. The population was ethnically categorized and either re-Germanized or disfranchised and partially deported into the Government as Poles.After the eventual German defeat which ended World War II in the European theatre of war in 1945, Rybnik was once more integrated into Poland, the territory of which was now being shifted westward on Stalins initiative. Rybnik thus ceased to be German-Polish border city. Its population was again categorized to be either re-polonized or forcefully resettled to Germany. A large portion of ethnic Germans from Rybnik eventually settled in the West German city of Dorsten (District of Recklinghausen), which eventually became one of Rybniks towns in 1994.In the post-war period, coal mining continued to gain importance. The 1970s saw the construction of a coal-fired power station, which is important for power generation in the region and beyond. A reservoir on the river Ruda was constructed to provide it with cooling water. In 2002, the University of Economics (Akademia Ekomomiczna), the of Silesia (Uniwersytet lski), both in based Katowice, and the Silesian Polytechnic University (Politechnika lska) based in Gliwice established a joint campus in Rybnik to improve academic training opportunities in the area. Tourism In contrast to the central part of the Silesian Industry Area a short distance to the north, Rybnik enjoys the reputation of a green city having a relatively clean environment. While the city is no centre of tourism, it does have various interesting sights and opportunities for recreation. To the north-east of the built-up area, there is a reservoir (Zalew Rybnicki) on the river Ruda, which serves as a cooling water source for the power station. Surrounded by forests, it offers swimming, fishing, sailing and surfing opportunities, and due to the power stations waste heat it is warm enough all year to be a habitat for carps. The Mountains, a popular recreational area, also for skiing, are within a 12 hours drive.Sights worth visiting:* the neo-gothic basilica of St. Anthony (Bazylika w. Antoniego),* the building of the former district authority (1887),* the neo-classical new town hall (1928),* the neo-classical old town hall with clock-tower, today housing the office and the museum of local history,* the Church of St. Catherine (Koci w. Katarzyny) (1534),* the Church of St. Lawrence (Koci w. Wawrzyca) (1717),* a late Baroque estate house (1736),* a Piast castle from the early 13th century, completely redesigned in the 18th century.Famous people from Rybnik * Dudek, Madrid and Polish national football team goalkeeper,* Grecki, composer of classical music.* Landsberg, German politician.* Zdebel, Polish football player of Silesian-German descent.* Sonnet, Polish model and singer.* Grychtowna, Polish pianist* Makowicz, Polish jazz pianist* Paleczny, Polish pianist* Godoj, winner of 2008 sucht den Superstar* Krupa, actorSportsIn 2006, the 8th European Glider Aerobatic Championships took place in Rybnik.The aeroclub of Rybnik is very successful in national and international glider aerobatic competitions: Makula won the European Glider Aerobatic Championships two times and the World Glider Aerobatic Championships six times.(Rankings of Jerzy Makula in FAI European and World Aerobatic Championships - accessed 2008-02-09) Other current or former members of the Polish national glider aerobatics team from Aeroclub ROW are Magorzata Margaska, Krzysztof Brzikalik, Lucjan Fizia, Stanisaw Makula and Ireneusz Boczkowski.(Aeroclub ROW: aerobatics (in Polish) - accessed 2008-02-09) Team from Rybnik * Rybnik - speedwayInternational relationsTwin towns  sister citiesRybnik is twinned with:(accessdate2008-11-01) References;NotesExternal links* Rybniks official website (Polish, some content in English)* Commercial information portal (Polish only)* Independent information portal (Polish only)* Photo-website (Polish and Silesian)* Rybnik, Silesia (Polish, some content in English)* Football fan site (KS ROW Rybnik) (Polish only)* German minority in Rybnik (German)* Friends of Rybnik in Dorsten, a twin town (German)* Company Information portal (Polish only)* Smolna information portal  (Polish only)* Rybnik during World War II (Polish only)* rybnickie pismo akademickie KAMPUS()cs:Rybnikde:Rybnikel:es:Rybnikeo:Rybnikfa:fr:Rybnikid:Rybnikit:Rybnikjv:Rybnikcsb:Rybniklv:Ribikalt:Rybnikashu:Rybnikms:Rybnikna:Rybniknl:Rybnikja:no:Rybniknn:Rybniknds:Rybnikpl:Rybnikpt:Rybnikro:Rybnikqu:Rybnikru:simple:Rybniksk:Rybnikszl:Rybikfi:Rybniksv:Rybnik()vi:Rybnikwar:Rybnikzh:
76301
Ride_the_High_Country
 language        EnglishRide the High Country is a noted 1962 American film.  It stars McCrea, Scott, Starr, Buchanan and Hartley. It was written by N.B. Stone Jr., Robert Creighton Williams (uncredited) and Peckinpah (uncredited) and directed by Peckinpah, with a score written by Bassman and filmed in the National Forest, CA.(http://www.tcm.com/tcmdb/title.jsp?stid2827&categoryNotes)In 1992, this film was selected for preservation in the Film Registry by the States of Congress as being deemed culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant. A Region 1 DVD edition was released on January 10, 2006. Peckinpah flipped a coin to decide whether Randolph Scott or Joel McCrea would receive top billing. McCreas role is actually slightly larger than Scotts, but Scott was billed over McCrea.  Critics occasionally point out that McCreas role seems to have been written for Cooper and that Wayne would have been perfect for Scotts part, but Cooper and Wayne never worked together. In his autobiography In the Arena (1995), Heston wrote that he was considering remaking the film in the late 1980s, presumably with Eastwood as a co-star.  Heston was convinced to take the part on Peckinpahs next film, Dundee (1965), after viewing Ride the High Country. The film features Scott in his final role as he had decided to retire.  Initially, McCrea also had announced his intentions to retire, but he later changed his mind.PlotThe film reunites old friends and aging ex-lawmen Gil Westrum (Scott) and Steve Judd (McCrea). The two men, mainly because of their age, have been reduced by circumstance to guarding a shipment of gold from a high country mining camp. However, Westrum and his young sidekick Heck Longtree (Starr) are, in fact, planning to steal the gold for themselves. Westrum attempts to subtly recruit Judd to their plan over the course of the ride.Acquiring a young girl named Elsa Knudsen (Hartley) escaping from her domineering father as a traveling companion, the three men reach the mining camp only to discover that the girls fianc (Drury) is a drunken lout who intends to prostitute her to his brothers (played by, among others, Peckinpah regulars Oates and Jones). They rescue the girl from the marriage and start off towards town with the girl and the gold. At this point, Judd realizes Westrums plan and confronts him. Planning to put him on trial when he returns to town, Judd is forced to relent when the jilted groom and his brothers appear in hot pursuit.  The aging men shoot it out with the brothers, killing them all in a heroic, face-to-face confrontation. Judd, mortally wounded, asks to die alone. Westrum promises him that he will get the gold back to town as Judd would have wanted. Westrum also promises to do what he can for Heck and Elsa, who during the course of the film become attracted to one other. The celebrated final image is of a dying Judd looking toward the high country as he falls slowly out of frame.Cast* Scott as Gil Westrum * McCrea as Steve Judd * Hartley as Elsa Knudsen * Starr as Heck Longtree * Buchanan as Judge Tolliver * Armstrong as Joshua Knudsen * Jackson as Kate * Drury as Billy Hammond * Jones as Sylvus Hammond * John Anderson as Elder Hammond * Davis Chandler as Jimmy Hammond * Oates as Henry HammondReceptionRide the High Country was not an immediate success in the United States, but it was hailed as a success upon its release in Europe, beating Fellinis classic 8 for first prize at the Belgium Film Festival and winning the Paris film critics award for best film.  Critics were particularly enthusiastic about the films mix of the conventional and the revisionist in its treatment of the Western.  They hailed Peckinpah as a worthy successor to classic Western directors such as Ford.The films reputation has only grown in following years, with Peckinpahs admirers citing it as his first great film.  They also note that all of the themes of Peckinpahs later films, such as honor and ideals compromised by circumstance, the difficulty of doing right in an unjust world, the destruction of the West and its heroes by industrial modernity, and the importance of loyalty between men are all present in Ride the High Country for the first time.References	External links* * * * Article at Classic Movies website(Film)de feu dans la SierranellAlta Sierrathe High Countryo zmierzchuthe High Country red efter guld
77667
Siege_of_Petersburg
strength2average of 52,000The Richmond&ndash;Petersburg Campaign was a series of battles around Virginia, fought from June 9, 1864, to March 25, 1865,(NPS Civil War Battle Summaries by Campaign (Eastern Theater). Military historians do not agree on precise boundaries between the campaigns of this era. This article uses the classification maintained by the U.S. Park Service. See Classifying the campaigns.) during the Civil War. Although it is more popularly known as the Siege of Petersburg, it was not a classic military siege, in which a city is usually surrounded and all supply lines are cut off, nor was it strictly limited to actions against Petersburg. The campaign was nine months of warfare in which Union forces commanded by Lt. Gen. S. Grant assaulted Petersburg unsuccessfully and then constructed trench lines that eventually extended over  from the eastern outskirts of Virginia, to around the eastern and southern outskirts of Petersburg. Petersburg was crucial to the supply of Confederate Gen. E. Lees army and the Confederate capital of Richmond. Numerous raids were conducted and battles fought in attempts to cut off the railroad supply lines through Petersburg to Richmond, and many of these caused the lengthening of the trench lines, overloading dwindling Confederate resources.Lee finally yielded to the overwhelming pressure&mdash;the point at which supply lines were finally cut and a true siege would have begun&mdash;and abandoned both cities in April 1865, leading to his  retreat and surrender at  Appomattox Court House. The Siege of Petersburg foreshadowed the trench warfare that was common in War I, earning it a prominent position in military history. It also featured the wars largest concentration of African American troops, who suffered heavy casualties at such engagements as the of the Crater and Chaffins Farm.BackgroundIn March 1864, Ulysses S. Grant was promoted to lieutenant general and was given command of the Union Army. He devised a coordinated strategy to apply pressure on the Confederacy from many points, something President Lincoln had urged his generals to do from the beginning of the war. Grant put Maj. Gen. T. Sherman in immediate command of all forces in the West and moved his own headquarters to be with the of the Potomac (still commanded by Maj. Gen. G. Meade) in Virginia, where he intended to maneuver Lees army to a decisive battle; his secondary objective was to capture Richmond (the capital of the Confederacy), but Grant knew that the latter would happen automatically once the former was accomplished. His coordinated strategy called for Grant and Meade to attack Lee from the north, while Maj. Gen. Benjamin Butler drove toward Richmond from the southeast; Maj. Gen. Sigel to control the Shenandoah Valley; Sherman to invade Georgia, defeat Gen. E. Johnston, and capture Atlanta; Brig. Gens. Crook and W. Averell to operate against railroad supply lines in Virginia; and Maj. Gen. Nathaniel P. Banks to capture Alabama.(Welsh, p. 96; Eicher, pp. 661, 691-92; Davis, p. 18; Salmon, p. 251; Fuller, pp. 207-08.)Most of these initiatives failed, often because of the assignment of generals to Grant for political rather than military reasons. Butlers of the James bogged down against inferior forces under Gen. Beauregard before Richmond in the Hundred Campaign. Sigel was soundly defeated at the of New Market in May and soon afterward he was replaced by Maj. Gen. Hunter. Banks was distracted by the River Campaign and failed to move on Mobile. However, Crook and Averell were able to cut the last railway linking Virginia and Tennessee, and Shermans Campaign was a success, although it dragged on through the fall.(Eicher, pp. 680-82, 691-93; Davis, p. 18; Hattaway and Jones, pp. 517-26; Fuller, pp. 207-08, 229-30.)On May 4, Grant and Meades Army of the Potomac crossed the River and entered the area known as the Wilderness of Spotsylvania, beginning the six-week Campaign. At the bloody but tactically inconclusive of the Wilderness (May 5&ndash;7) and of Spotsylvania Court House (May 8&ndash;21), Grant failed to destroy Lees army but, unlike his predecessors, did not retreat after the battles; he repeatedly moved his army leftward to the southeast in a campaign that kept Lee on the defensive and moved ever closer to Richmond. Grant spent the remainder of May maneuvering and fighting minor battles with the Confederate army as he attempted to turn Lees flank and lure him into the open. Grant knew that his larger army and base of manpower in the North could sustain a war of attrition better than Lee and the Confederacy could. This theory was tested at the of Cold Harbor (May 31 &ndash; June 12) when Grants army once again came into contact with Lees near Mechanicsville. He chose to engage Lees army directly, by ordering a frontal assault on the Confederate fortified positions on June 3. This attack was repulsed with heavy losses. Cold Harbor was a battle that Grant regretted more than any other and Northern newspapers thereafter frequently referred to him as a butcher. Although Grant suffered high losses during the campaign&mdash;approximately 50,000 casualties, or 41%&mdash;Lee lost even higher percentages of his men&mdash;approximately 32,000, or 46%&mdash;losses that could not be replaced.(Welsh, pp. 96, 101; Eicher, pp. 663-87; Hattaway and Jones, pp. 540-46, 552-67, 577-80; Salmon, pp. 251-58; Bonekemper, p. 190.)On the night of June 12, Grant again advanced by his left flank, marching to the James River. He planned to cross to the south bank of the river, bypassing Richmond, and isolate Richmond by seizing the railroad junction of Petersburg to the south. While Lee remained unaware of Grants intentions, the Union army constructed a bridge 2,100 feet (640 m) long and crossed the James River on June 14&ndash;18. What Lee had feared most of all&mdash;that Grant would force him into a siege of Richmond&mdash;was poised to occur. Petersburg, a prosperous city of 18,000, was a supply center for Richmond, given its strategic location just south of Richmond, its site on the River that provided navigable access to the James River, and its role as a major crossroads and junction for five railroads. Since Petersburg was the main supply base and rail depot for the entire region, including Richmond, the taking of Petersburg by Union forces would make it impossible for Lee to continue defending Richmond (the Confederate capital). This represented a change of strategy from that of the preceding Overland Campaign, in which confronting and defeating Lees army in the open was the primary goal. Now, Grant selected a geographic and political target and knew that his superior resources could besiege Lee there, pin him down, and either starve him into submission or lure him out for a decisive battle. Lee at first believed that Grants main target was Richmond and devoted only minimal troops under Gen. P.G.T. Beauregard to the defense of Petersburg.(Welsh, pp. 102, 118; Davis, pp. 34-36; Welcher, p. 994; Eicher, p. 687; Hattaway and Jones, pp. 588-91; Salmon, pp. 395-96.)Opposing forcesAt the beginning of the campaign, Grants Union forces consisted of the of the Potomac, under Maj. Gen. G. Meade, and the of the James, under Maj. Gen. Benjamin Butler. The Army of the Potomac included:(Trudeau, pp. 486-92.)* II Corps, under Maj. Gen. S. Hancock, including the divisions of Maj. Gens. B. Birney and Gibbon and Brig. Gen. C. Barlow.* V Corps, under Maj. Gen. K. Warren, including the divisions of Brig. Gens. Griffin, B. Ayres, W. Crawford, and Cutler.* VI Corps, under Maj. Gen. G. Wright, including the divisions of Brig. Gens. David A. Russell, H. Neill, and B. Ricketts. (The VI Corps was on detached service in the Valley from mid-July to early December 1864.)(Trudeau, p. 489.)* IX Corps, under Maj. Gen. Burnside, including the divisions of Brig. Gens. H. Ledlie, B. Potter, B. Willcox, and Ferrero (the latter division being manned by States Colored Troops). Maj. Gen. G. Parke replaced Burnside after the of the Crater.(Trudeau, p. 490.)* Cavalry Corps, under Maj. Gen. H. Sheridan, including the divisions of Brig. Gens. Alfred T.A. Torbert, McM. Gregg, and H. Wilson. Sheridan and much of his command were on detached service in the Shenandoah Valley from mid-July 1864 to late March 1865. Upon their return, Sheridan often referred to his Cavalry Corps as the Army of the Shenandoah, reflecting their role in the Campaigns of 1864.(Trudeau, p. 491.)The Army of the James included:(Trudeau, pp. 492-95.) * X Corps, under Brig. Gen. Alfred H. Terry, including the divisions of Brig. Gens. Robert S. Foster and Ames.* XVIII Corps, under Maj. Gen. William F. Baldy Smith, including the divisions of Brig. Gens. T. H. Brooks, H. Martindale, and W. Hinks (the latter also a USCT division).* XXIV Corps, under Maj. Gen. O.C. Ord, including the divisions of Brig. Gen. Robert S. Foster, Maj. Gen. M. Harris, and Brig. Gen. Devens.* XXV Corps, under Maj. Gen. Weitzel, including the divisions of Brig. Gens. J. Paine, Birney, and A. Wild.* Cavalry Division, under Brig. Gen. Kautz.On December 3, 1864, the racially integrated X Corps and XVIII Corps were reorganized to become the all-white XXIV Corps and the all-black (officers excepted) XXV Corps.(Trudeau, p. 485.)Grant made his headquarters in a cabin on the lawn of Manor, the home of Dr. Eppes and the oldest home (built in 1763) in what was then City Point, but is now Virginia.Lees Confederate force consisted of his own of Northern Virginia, as well as a scattered, disorganized group of 10,000 men defending Richmond under Gen. P.G.T. Beauregard. Many of the men under Beauregards command consisted of soldiers who were either too young or too old to fight in the Army of Northern Virginia, or men who had been discharged from Lees army due to wounds that rendered them unfit for service. The Army of Northern Virginia was initially organized into four corps:(Trudeau, pp. 495-501; Welsh, p. 118.)* First Corps, under Lt. Gen. H. Anderson, including the divisions of Maj. Gens. E. Pickett, W. Field, and B. Kershaw. Lt. Gen. Longstreet returned from medical leave and resumed command of the corps on October 19.(Trudeau, p. 227.) Anderson was given command of the new Fourth Corps, which included the division of Maj. Gen. R. Johnson.(Trudeau, p. 501.)* Second Corps, under Lt. Gen. A. Early, was detached on June 12 for operations in the Shenandoah Valley and played no direct role in the defense of Petersburg.* Third Corps, under Lt. Gen. Hill, including the divisions of Maj. Gens. Heth and M. Wilcox and Brig. Gen. Mahone.* Cavalry Corps, under Maj. Gen. Wade Hampton, including the divisions of Maj. Gens. Lee and W.H.F. Rooney Lee.Beauregards Department of North Carolina and Southern Virginia had four depleted divisions commanded by Maj. Gens. Ransom, Jr., Robert F. Hoke, and H. C. Whiting, and Brig. Gen. H. Colquitt. (Later in the campaign, Beauregards department was expanded and reorganized to consist of the divisions of Maj. Gens. Hoke and Johnson.)(Eicher, p. 680.)Grants armies were significantly larger than Lees during the campaign, although the strengths varied. During the initial assaults on the city, 15,000 Federal troops faced about 5,400 men under Beauregard. By June 18, the Federal strength exceeded 67,000 against the Confederate 20,000. More typical of the full campaign was in mid-July, when 70,000 Union troops faced 36,000 Confederates around Petersburg, and 40,000 men under Butler faced 21,000 around Richmond.(Davis, pp. 18, 49, 64.) The Union Army, despite suffering horrific losses during the Overland Campaign, was able to replenish its soldiers and equipment, taking advantage of garrison troops from D.C., and the increasing availability of African-American soldiers. By the end of the siege, Grant had 125,000 men to begin the Campaign.(Eicher, p. 806.) The Confederate army, in contrast, had difficulty replacing men lost through battle, disease, and desertion. As a result of this severe lack of manpower facing the Confederates, when Beauregards men occupied the trenches around the city, there were gaps in the line of up to  between men.(Welsh, p. 118.)Initial attempts to capture PetersburgButlers assault (June 9)While Lee and Grant faced each other after Cold Harbor, Benjamin Butler became aware that Confederate troops had been moving north to reinforce Lee, leaving the defenses of Petersburg in a vulnerable state. Sensitive to his failure in the Bermuda Hundred Campaign, Butler sought to achieve a success to vindicate his generalship. He wrote, the capture of Petersburg lay near my heart.(Salmon, p. 395; Davis, p. 27.)Petersburg was protected by multiple lines of fortifications, the outermost of which was known as the Dimmock Line, a line of earthworks and trenches  long, with 55 redoubts, east of the city. The 2,500 Confederates stretched thin along this defensive line were commanded by a former Virginia governor, Brig. Gen. A. Wise. Despite the number of fortifications, because of a series of hills and valleys around the outskirts of Petersburg there were several places along the outer defenses where cavalry could easily ride through undetected until they reached the inner defenses of the city.(Kennedy, p. 352; Welsh, p. 118; Salmon, pp. 401-03.)Butlers plan was formulated on the afternoon of June 8, 1864, calling for three columns to cross the Appomattox and advance with 4,500 men. The first and second consisted of infantry from Maj. Gen. A. Gillmores X Corps and Colored Troops from Brig. Gen. W. Hinkss 3rd Division of XVIII Corps, which was to attack the Dimmock Line east of the city. The third was 1,300 cavalrymen under Brig. Gen. Kautz, who were to sweep around Petersburg and strike it from the southeast. The troops moved out on the night of June 8, but made poor progress. Eventually the infantry crossed by 3:40 a.m. on June 9 and by 7 a.m., both Gillmore and Hinks had encountered the enemy, but stopped at their fronts. Gillmore told Hinks that he would attack but that both of the infantry columns should await the cavalry assault from the south.(Davis, pp. 27-31; Kennedy, p. 352; Salmon, p. 401.)Kautzs men did not arrive until noon, however, having been delayed en route by numerous enemy pickets. They assaulted the Dimmock Line where it crossed the Jerusalem Plank Road (present-day Route 301, Crater Road). The Confederates Battery 27, also known as Rivess Salient, was manned by 150 militiamen commanded by Maj. Fletcher H. Archer. Kautz first launched a probing attack, then paused. His main attack was by the 11th Pennsylvania Cavalry against the Home Guard, a group consisting primarily of teenagers, elderly men, and some wounded soldiers from city hospitals. The Home Guards retreated to the city with heavy losses, but by this time Beauregard had been able to bring reinforcements from Richmond to bear, which were able to repulse the Union assault. Kautz, hearing no activity on Gillmores front, presumed that he was left on his own and withdrew. Confederate casualties were about 80, Union 40. Butler was furious with Gillmores timidity and incompetence and arrested him. Gillmore requested a court of inquiry, which was never convened, but Grant later reassigned him and the incident was dropped.(Davis, p. 33; Kennedy, p. 352; Salmon, p. 403.)Meades assaults (June 15&ndash;18)Inexplicably, Grant selected Butlers Army of the James, which had performed poorly in the Bermuda Hundred Campaign, to lead the expedition toward Petersburg. On June 14 he directed Butler to augment the XVIII Corps, commanded by Brig. Gen. William F. Baldy Smith, to a strength of 16,000 men, including Kautzs cavalry division, and use the same route employed in the unsuccessful attacks of June 9. Since Beauregard had insufficient men available to defend the entire Dimmock Line, he concentrated 2,200 troops under Brig. Gen. A. Wise in the northeastern sector. Even with his concentration, infantrymen were spaced an unacceptable  apart. His remaining 3,200 men were facing Butlers army at Bermuda Hundred.(Trudeau, pp. 38-39; Davis, pp. 37-39.)Baldy Smith and his men crossed the Appomattox shortly after dawn on June 15. Kautzs cavalry, leading the advance, encountered an unexpected stronghold at Baylors farm northeast of Petersburg. Brig. Gen. W. Hinkss men launched two attacks on the Confederates and captured a cannon, but the overall advance was delayed until early afternoon. Smith started his attack after delaying until about 7 p.m., deploying a strong skirmish line that swept over the earthworks on a  front, causing the Confederates to retreat to a weaker defensive line on Harrisons Creek. Despite this initial success and the prospect of a virtually undefended city immediately to his front, Smith decided to wait until dawn to resume his attack. By this time Maj. Gen. S. Hancock, the II Corps commander, had arrived at Smiths headquarters. The normally decisive and pugnacious Hancock, who outranked Smith, was uncertain of his orders and the disposition of forces, and uncharacteristically deferred to Smiths judgment to wait.(Trudeau, pp. 37-45, 51; Davis, pp. 39-44; Salmon, pp. 403-05.)Beauregard wrote later that Petersburg at that hour was clearly at the mercy of the Federal commander, who had all but captured it. But he used the time he had been granted to good advantage. Receiving no guidance from Richmond in response to his urgent requests, he unilaterally decided to strip his defenses from the Howlett Line, which was bottling up Butlers army in Bermuda Hundred, making the divisions of Maj. Gens. Hoke and Johnson available for the new Petersburg defensive line. Butler might have used this opportunity to move his army between Petersburg and Richmond, which would have doomed the Confederate capital, but he once again failed to act.(Fuller, p. 226; Davis, p. 43.)By the morning of June 16, Beauregard had concentrated about 14,000 men in his defensive line, but this paled in comparison to the 50,000 federals that now faced him. Grant had arrived with Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnsides IX Corps, addressed the confusion of Hancocks orders, and ordered a reconnaissance for weak points in the defensive line. Hancock, in temporary command of the Army of the Potomac until Maj. Gen. George G. Meade arrived, prepared Smiths XVIII corps on the right, his own II Corps in the center, and Burnsides IX Corps on the left. Hancocks assault began around 5:30 p.m. as all three corps moved slowly forward. Beauregards men fought fiercely, erecting new breastworks to the rear as breakthroughs occurred. Upon the arrival of General Meade, a second attack was ordered and Brig. Gen. C. Barlow led his division forward. Although Barlows men managed to capture their objectives, a counterattack drove them back, taking numerous Union prisoners. The survivors dug in close to the enemy works.(Davis, pp. 44-45; Trudeau, pp. 47-48; Welsh, p. 120.)June 17 was a day of uncoordinated Union attacks, starting on the left flank where two brigades of Burnsides IX Corps under Brig. Gen. B. Potter stealthily approached the Confederate line and launched a surprise attack at dawn. Initially successful, it captured nearly a mile of the Confederate fortifications and about 600 prisoners, but the effort eventually failed when Potters men moved forward to find another line of entrenchments. IX Corps assaults at 2 p.m., led by the brigade of Brig. Gen. F. Hartranft, and in the evening, by Brig. Gen. H. Ledlies division, both failed.(Davis, pp. 45-46; Salmon, p. 405; Trudeau, pp. 48-49.)During the day, Beauregards engineers had laid out new defensive positions a mile to the west of the Dimmock Line, which the Confederates occupied late that night. Robert E. Lee had systematically ignored all of Beauregards pleas for reinforcements  until now, but dispatched two divisions of his men, exhausted from the Overland Campaign, to Petersburg, beginning at 3 a.m. on June 18. With the arrival of Lees two divisions, under Maj. Gen. B. Kershaw and W. Field, Beauregard had over 20,000 men to defend the city, but Grants force had been augmented by the arrival of Maj. Gen. K. Warrens V Corps and 67,000 Federals were present.(Davis, pp. 46-50; Salmon, pp. 405-06; Trudeau, pp. 51-53.)On the morning of June 18, Meade, went into a rage directed at his corps commanders because of this armys failure to take the initiative and break through the thinly defended Confederate positions and seize the city. He ordered the entire Army of the Potomac to attack the Confederate defenses. The first Union attack began at dawn, started by the II and XVIII Corps on the Union right. The II Corps was surprised to make rapid progress against the Confederate line, not realizing that Beauregard had moved it back the night before. When they encountered the second line, the attack immediately ground to a halt and the corps suffered under heavy Confederate fire for hours.(Welsh, p. 121; Davis, pp. 46-50; Salmon, pp. 405-06; Trudeau, pp. 51-53.) By noon, another attack plan had been devised to break through the Confederate defenses. However, by this time, elements of Lees army had reinforced Beauregards troops. By the time the Union attack was renewed, Lee himself had taken command of the defenses. Maj. Gen. B. Willcoxs division of the IX Corps led the renewed attack but it suffered significant losses in the marsh and open fields crossed by Taylors Branch. Warrens V Corps was halted by murderous fire from Rivess Salient, an attack in which Col. Lawrence Chamberlain of the 20th Maine was severely wounded. At 6:30 p.m., Meade ordered a final assault, which also failed with more horrendous losses. One of the leading regiments was the Maine Heavy Artillery Regiment, which lost 632 of 900 men in the assault, the heaviest single-battle loss of any regiment during the entire war.(Welsh, p. 121; Davis, pp. 49-52; Eicher, p. 690; Salmon, p. 406; Trudeau, pp. 53-54.)Having achieved almost no gains from four days of assaults, and with Lincoln facing re-election in the upcoming months in the face of a loud public outcry against the casualty figures, Meade ordered his army to dig in, starting the ten-month siege. During the four days of fighting, Union casualties were 11,386 (1,688 killed, 8,513 wounded, 1,185 missing or captured), Confederate 4,000 (200 killed, 2,900 wounded, 900 missing or captured).(Bonekemper, p. 313. The author presents casualty figures from a wide variety of sources and provides his best estimate. Trudeau, p. 55, agrees with the 4,000 Confederate losses, but cites Union killed and wounded at 8,150, with an additional 1,814 missing. Kennedy, p. 353, cites 9,964&ndash;10,600 for the Union, 2,974&ndash;4,700 for the Confederates; Salmon, p. 406, cites 8,150 Federal and 3,236 Confederate casualties; Welsh, p. 122, provides the breakdown of the 4,000 Confederate casualties.)Initial attempts to cut the railroads (June 21&ndash;30)After failing to capture Petersburg by assault, Grants first objective was secure the three remaining open rail lines that served Petersburg and Richmond: the and Petersburg Railroad; the South Side Railroad, which reached to Lynchburg in the west; and the Weldon Railroad, also called the Petersburg and Weldon Railroad, which led to North Carolina, and the Confederacys only remaining major port, North Carolina. Grant decided on a wide-ranging cavalry raid (the Wilson-Kautz Raid)(Salmon, p. 406, considers the Battle of Jerusalem Plank Road to be the initial action of the Wilson-Kautz raid of June 22&ndash;30, but this is not a convention widely accepted by other historians.) against the South Side and Weldon railroads, but he also directed that a significant infantry force be sent against the Weldon closer to his current position. Meade selected the II Corps, still temporarily commanded by Birney,(Trudeau, p. 65. Despite Hancocks incapacitation, he chose to accompany the column.) and Wrights VI Corps.(Salmon, p. 406; Trudeau, p. 63-65.)Jerusalem Plank Road (June 21&ndash;23)On June 21, elements of the II Corps probed toward the railroad and skirmished with Confederate cavalry. By the morning of June 22, a gap opened up between the two corps. While the II Corps moved forward, the VI Corps encountered Confederate troops from Maj. Gen. Wilcoxs division of Lt. Gen. Hills corps and they began to entrench rather than advance. Brig. Gen. Mahone observed that the gap between the two Union corps was widening, creating a prime target. Mahone had been a railroad engineer before the war and had personally surveyed this area south of Petersburg, so he was familiar with a ravine that could be used to hide the approach of a Confederate attack column. At 3 p.m., Mahones men emerged in the rear of the II Corps division of Brig. Gen. C. Barlow, catching them by surprise, and Barlows division quickly collapsed. The division of Brig. Gen. Gibbon, which had erected earthworks, was also surprised by an attack from the rear and many of the regiments ran for safety. The II Corps troops rallied around earthworks that they had constructed on the night of June 21 and stabilized their lines. Darkness ended the fighting.(Kennedy, pp. 353-54; Eicher, p. 690; Trudeau, pp. 69-74; Salmon, pp. 406-08.)On June 23, the II Corps advanced to retake its lost ground, but the Confederates had pulled back, abandoning the earthworks they had captured. Under orders from General Meade, the VI Corps sent out a heavy skirmish line after 10 a.m. in a second attempt to reach the Weldon Railroad. Men from Brig. Gen. A. Grants Vermont Brigade had begun tearing up track when they were attacked by a larger force of Confederate infantry. Numerous Vermonters were taken prisoner and only about half a mile of track had been destroyed when they were chased away. Meade was unable to urge Wright forward and called off the operation. Union casualties were 2,962, Confederate 572.(Kennedy, 354. Trudeau, p. 78, lists the Union II Corps casualties as 650 killed and wounded, 1,742 captured; VI Corps casualties as 150. on the Confederate side, Trudeau, p. 80, lists Mahones casualties as 421, Wilcoxs 151.) The battle was inconclusive, with advantages gained on both sides. The Confederates were able to retain control of the Weldon Railroad. The Federals were able to destroy a short segment of the Weldon before being driven off, but more importantly, the siege lines were stretched further to the west.(Kennedy, p. 354; Trudeau, pp. 80-81.)Wilson-Kautz Raid (June 22 &ndash; July 1) In parallel to Birneys and Wrights infantry action at the Jerusalem Plank Road, Brig. Gen. H. Wilson was ordered by Meade to conduct a raid destroying as much track as possible south and southwest of Petersburg. Grant considered Wilsons 3rd Division of the Cavalry Corps too small to conduct the operation alone&mdash;particularly since Meade required Wilson to leave 1,400 men behind for picket duty&mdash;so he directed Butler to contribute Brig. Gen. Kautzs small division (2,000 troopers) to the effort. Early on the morning of June 22, 3,300 men,(Longacre, p. 289; Salmon, 397; Kennedy, p. 303, and Salmon, p. 410, cite 5,500 men.) and 12 guns organized into two batteries, departed Mount Sinai Church and began to destroy railroad track and cars of the Weldon Railroad at Reams Station,(Located at the currently unincorporated community of Reams, Virginia, this railroad station is referred to variously as Reams, Reams, and Reamss Station.)  south of Petersburg. Kautzs men moved to the west to Fords Station and began destroying track, locomotives, and cars on the South Side Railroad.(Salmon, p. 397; Longacre, pp. 287-89; Starr, pp. 179-81.)On June 23, Wilson proceeded to the junction of the and Danville Railroad at Burkeville, where he encountered elements of Rooney Lees cavalry between Nottoway Court House and Blacks and Whites (modern-day Blackstone). The Confederates struck the rear of his column, forcing Col. George A. Chapmans brigade to fend them off. Wilson followed Kautz along the South Side Railroad, destroying about 30 miles (50 km) of track as they went. On June 24, while Kautz remained skirmishing around Burkeville, Wilson crossed over to Meherrin Station on the Richmond and Danville and began destroying track.(Longacre, p. 289; Starr, pp. 181-91.)On June 25, Wilson and Kautz continued tearing up track south to the Staunton River Bridge at Roanoke Station (modern-day Randolph), where they encountered approximately 1,000 Old Men and Boys (the Home Guard), commanded by Capt. Benjamin L. Farinholt, dug in with earthworks and prepared artillery positions at the bridge. The of Staunton River Bridge was a minor affair in which Kautz attempted multiple frontal assaults against the Home Guard, but his men never came closer than . Lees cavalry division closed on the Federals from the northeast and skirmish with Wilsons rear guard. Casualties on the Union side amounted to 42 killed, 44 wounded, and 30 missing or captured; Confederate losses were 10 killed and 24 wounded. Kautzs men gave up and retreated to the railroad depot at 9 p.m. Despite these relatively minor losses, the two Union cavalry generals decided to abandon their mission, leaving the Staunton River bridge intact and having inflicted only minor damage on the railroads.(Salmon, pp. 411-13; Longacre, pp. 289-90; Starr, pp. 191-93.)As Wilson and Kautz turned back to the east after their defeat at Staunton River Bridge, Rooney Lees cavalry pursued and threatened their rear. Meanwhile, Robert E. Lee ordered Maj. Gen. Wade Hamptons cavalry, which had been engaged with Maj. Gen. H. Sheridans cavalry at the of Trevilian Station on June 11&ndash;12, to join the pursuit and attack Wilson and Kautz. Before leaving on his raid, Wilson had received assurances from Meades chief of staff, Maj. Gen. A. Humphreys, that the Army of the Potomac would be immediately taking control of the Weldon Railroad at least as far south as Reams Station, so Wilson decided that would be an appropriate place to return to Union lines. The Union defeat at Jerusalem Plank Road made those assurances inoperable. Wilson and Kautz were surprised on the afternoon of June 28 when they reached Stony Creek Station,  south of Reams, as hundreds of Hamptons cavalrymen (under Brig. Gen. R. Chambliss) and infantry blocked their path. In the of Sappony Church, Wilsons men tried to break through, but had to fall back when Confederate Brig. Gen. C. Butler and L. Rosser threatened to envelop Wilsons left flank. Kautzs division, following Wilsons, took a back road in the direction of Reams Station and was attacked by Rooney Lees division late in the day. The Union cavalrymen were able to slip out of the trap under the cover of darkness and rode north on the Halifax Road for the supposed security of Reams Station.(Salmon, pp. 414-15; Longacre, pp. 290-91; Starr, pp. 193-96.)In the Battle of Reams Station on June 29, Kautz approached Reams Station from the west expecting to find the friendly infantry promised by Humphreys, but found Confederate infantry instead&mdash;Mahones division blocking the approaches to the Halifax Road and the railroad behind well constructed earthworks. Kautzs attack by the 11th Pennsylvania and the 1st District of Columbia Cavalry along the Depot Road was unsuccessful and Mahone counterattacked against the flank of the Pennsylvanians. On the Stage Road to the north of the station, the brigades of Brig. Gen. L. Lomax and C. Whitcomb maneuvered around the Ohio Cavalry and 5th New York Cavalry, turning the Federal left flank. Wilson sent a messenger north who was able to slip through the Confederate lines and urgently requested help from Meade at City Point. Meade alerted Wright to prepare to move his entire VI Corps to Reams Station, but he realized that it would take too long on foot and requested help from Phil Sheridans cavalry as well. Sheridan demurred, complaining of the effect on his worn-out horses and exhausted men. After the war, arguments persisted between Sheridan and Wilson about whether the former had adequately protected the raiders from the Confederate cavalry of Hampton and Fitzhugh Lee. Sheridan did reach Reams Station by 7 p.m., only to find that the VI Corps infantry had in fact arrived but that Wilson and Kautz had departed.(Salmon, pp. 414-15; Starr, pp. 197-204.)Caught in a trap without promise of immediate aid, the Wilson-Kautz raiders burned their wagons and destroyed their artillery pieces and fled to the north before the reinforcements arrived. They lost hundreds of men as prisoners in what was called a wild skedaddle. At least 300 escaped slaves who had joined the Union cavalrymen during the raid were abandoned during the retreat. The raiders reentered Federal lines around 2 p.m. on July 1. They had destroyed  of track, which took the Confederate several weeks to repair, but it came at the cost of 1,445 Union casualties, or about a quarter of their force (Wilson lost 33 killed, 108 wounded, and 674 captured or missing; Kautz lost 48 killed, 153 wounded, and 429 captured or missing). Although Wilson counted the raid as a strategic success, Ulysses S. Grant reluctantly described the expedition as a disaster.(Longacre, pp. 292-93; Salmon, pp. 415-16; Starr, pp. 203-07. Casualty figures are from Starr. Kennedy, p. 355, cites the total of 1,445. Salmon claims 1,800.)First Deep Bottom (July 27&ndash;29)In preparation for the forthcoming Battle of the Crater, Grant wanted Lee to dilute his forces in the Petersburg trenches by attracting them elsewhere. He ordered Hancocks II Corps and two divisions of Sheridans Cavalry Corps to cross the river to Deep Bottom by pontoon bridge and advance against the Confederate capital. His plan called for Hancock to pin down the Confederates at Chaffins Bluff and prevent reinforcements from opposing Sheridans cavalry, which would attack Richmond if practicable. If not&mdash;a circumstance Grant considered more likely&mdash;Sheridan was ordered to ride around the city to the north and west and cut the Central Railroad, which was supplying Richmond from the Valley.(Davis, 69-70; Salmon, p. 416; Horn, p. 102.)When Lee found out about Hancocks pending movement, he ordered that the Richmond lines be reinforced to 16,500 men. Maj. Gen. B. Kershaws division and brigades from Maj. Gen. M. Wilcoxs division moved east on New Market Road and took up positions on the eastern face of New Market Heights. Hancock and Sheridan crossed the pontoon bridge starting at 3 a.m., July 27. The II Corps took up positions on the east bank of Baileys Creek, from New Market Road to near Fussells Mill. Sheridans cavalry captured the high ground on the right, overlooking the millpond, but they were counterattacked and driven back. The Confederate works on the west bank of Baileys Creek were formidable and Hancock chose not to attack them, spending the rest of the day performing reconnaissance.(Horn, p. 103; Salmon, pp. 416-18.)While Hancock was stymied at Baileys Creek, Robert E. Lee began bringing up more reinforcements from Petersburg, reacting as Grant had hoped. He assigned Lt. Gen. H. Anderson to take command of the Deep Bottom sector and sent in Maj. Gen. Heths infantry division and Maj. Gen. W.H.F. Rooney Lees cavalry division. Troops were also hurriedly detailed from the Department of Richmond to help man the trenches.(Horn, p. 107.)On the morning of July 28, Grant reinforced Hancock with a brigade of the XIX Corps. Sheridans men attempted to turn the Confederate left, but their movement was disrupted by a Confederate attack. Three brigades attacked Sheridans right flank, but they were unexpectedly hit by heavy fire from the Union repeating carbines. Mounted Federals in Sheridans reserve pursued and captured nearly 200 prisoners.(Davis, p. 70; Salmon, p. 418; Horn, pp. 107-08.)No further combat occurred and the expedition against Richmond and its railroads was terminated on the afternoon of July 28. Satisfied that the operation had distracted sufficient Confederate forces from his front, General Grant determined to proceed with the assault against the Crater on July 30.(Horn, p. 108.)Union casualties at the First Battle of Deep Bottom were 488 (62 killed, 340 wounded, and 86 missing or captured); Confederate casualties were 679 (80 killed, 391 wounded, 208 missing or captured).(Bonekemper, p. 314. Salmon, p. 418, estimates 488 Union, 650 Confederate. Horn, p. 108, estimates 488 Union, 700 Confederate. Kennedy, p. 355, estimates 1,000 total.)The Crater (July 30) Grant wanted to defeat Lees army without resorting to a lengthy siege&mdash;his experience in the of Vicksburg told him that such affairs were expensive and difficult on the morale of his men. Lt. Col. Pleasants, commanding the 48th Pennsylvania Infantry of Maj. Gen. E. Burnsides IX Corps, offered a novel proposal to solve Grants problem. Pleasants, a mining engineer from Pennsylvania in civilian life, proposed digging a long mine shaft underneath the Confederate lines and planting explosive charges directly underneath a fort (Elliotts Salient) in the middle of the Confederate First Corps line. If successful, Union troops could drive through the resulting gap in the line into the Confederate rear area. Digging began in late June, creating a mine in a T shape with an approach shaft  long. At its end, a perpendicular gallery of  extended in both directions. The gallery was filled with 8,000 pounds of gunpowder, buried  underneath the Confederate works.(Eicher, pp. 720-21; Davis, pp. 67-69, 72; Trudeau, pp. 99-105; Kennedy, p. 355; Salmon, pp. 418-20; Welsh, p. 122.)Burnside had trained a division of States Colored Troops (USCT) under Brig. Gen. Ferrero to lead the assault. Two regiments were to leave the attack column and extend the breach by rushing perpendicular to the crater, while the remaining regiments were to rush through, seizing the Jerusalem Plank Road. Burnsides two other divisions, made up of white troops, would then move in, supporting Ferreros flanks and race for Petersburg itself. However, the day before the attack, Meade, who lacked confidence in the operation, ordered Burnside not to use the black troops in the lead assault, claiming that if the attack failed black soldiers would be killed needlessly, creating political repercussions in the North. Burnside protested to General Grant, who sided with Meade. When volunteers were not forthcoming Burnside selected a replacement white division by having the three commanders draw lots. Brig. Gen. H. Ledlies 1st Division was selected, but he failed to brief the men on what was expected of them and was reported during the battle to be drunk, well behind the lines, and providing no leadership. (Ledlie was later dismissed for his actions during the battle.)(Trudeau, pp. 106-07; Eicher, p. 721; Salmon, pp. 420-21; Davis, p. 74; Kennedy, p. 355; Welsh, p. 122.)thumb|left|300px|Sketch of the explosion seen from the Union line.At 4:44 a.m. on July 30, the charges exploded in a massive shower of earth, men, and guns. A crater (still visible today) was created,  long, 60 to  wide, and  deep. The blast destroyed the Confederate fortifications in the immediate vicinity, and instantly killed between 250 and 350 Confederate soldiers. Ledlies untrained white division was not prepared for the explosion, and reports indicate they waited ten minutes before leaving their own entrenchments. Once they had wandered to the crater, instead of moving around it as the black troops had been trained to do, they moved down into the crater itself. Since this was not the planned movement, there were no ladders provided for the men to use in exiting the crater. The Confederates, under Maj. Gen. Mahone, gathered as many troops together as they could for a counterattack. In about an hours time, they had formed up around the crater and began firing rifles and artillery down into it, in what Mahone later described as a turkey shoot. The plan had failed, but Burnside, instead of cutting his losses, sent in Ferreros men. Now faced with considerable flanking fire, they also went down into the crater, and for the next few hours, Mahones soldiers, along with those of Maj. Gen. Johnson and artillery, slaughtered the men of the IX Corps as they attempted to escape from the crater. Some Union troops eventually advanced and flanked to the right beyond the Crater to the earthworks and assaulted the Confederate lines, driving the Confederates back for several hours in hand-to-hand combat. Mahones Confederates conducted a sweep out of a sunken gully area about  from the right side of the Union advance. This charge reclaimed the earthworks and drove the Union force back towards the east.(Davis, pp. 75-88; Trudeau, pp. 109-26; Salmon, pp. 420-21; Eicher, pp. 721-22; Welsh, p. 122.)Grant wrote that, It was the saddest affair I have witnessed in the war.(Kennedy, p. 356.) Union casualties were 3,798 (504 killed, 1,881 wounded, 1,413 missing or captured), Confederate casualties were approximately 1,500 (200 killed, 900 wounded, 400 missing or captured). Many of these losses were suffered by Ferreros division of the USCT. Burnside was relieved of command.(Bonekemper, p. 315. Trudeau, p. 127 cites 3,798 Union, 1,491 Confederate (361 killed, 727 wounded, 403 missing or captured). Davis, p. 89, cites 3,500 Union casualties, 1,500 Confederate. Eicher, p. 723, cites 4,400 total casualties. Kennedy, p. 356, and Salmon, p. 421, cite 3,798 Union casualties, 1,491 Confederate.)Second Deep Bottom (August 14&ndash;20)On the same day the Union failed at the Crater, Confederate Lt. Gen. A. Early was burning the town of Pennsylvania, as he operated out of the Shenandoah Valley, threatening towns in Maryland and Pennsylvania, as well as the District of Columbia. Robert E. Lee was concerned about actions that Grant might take against Early and sent the infantry division of Maj. Gen. B. Kershaw from Lt. Gen. H. Andersons corps and the cavalry division commanded by Maj. Gen. Lee to Virginia, where they could either provide aid to Early or be recalled to the Richmond-Petersburg front as needed. Grant misinterpreted this movement and assumed that Andersons entire corps had been removed from the vicinity of Richmond, leaving only about 8,500 men north of the James River. He determined to try again with an advance toward the Confederate capital led by Hancock. This would either prevent reinforcements from aiding Early or once again dilute the Confederate strength in the defensive lines around Petersburg.(Davis, p. 95; Trudeau, pp. 142-43.)On August 13, the X Corps, commanded by Maj. Gen. B. Birney, and Brig. Gen. McM. Greggs cavalry division crossed pontoon bridges from Bermuda Hundred to Deep Bottom. The II Corps crossed by steamships the night of August 13&ndash;14. Birneys X Corps troops successfully pushed aside pickets on the Kingsland Road, but were stopped by the fortifications on New Market Heights. The II Corps units moved slowly into position, suffering numerous deaths from heat stroke.(Trudeau, pp. 147-52; Horn, pp. 120, 127; Davis, pp. 95-97; Salmon, p. 423.)It was not until midday on August 14 that the Union made contact with the Confederates, manning rifle pits on the Darbytown Road just north of the Long Bridge Road. The Union generals were surprised at the Confederate strength. On the right, a full Confederate division commanded by Maj. Gen. W. Field was dug in. Chaffins Bluff was defended by a division under Maj. Gen. M. Wilcox and reinforcements were arriving. Brig. Gen. C. Barlows 10,000 men in two divisions of II Corps attacked Fussells Mill. They were able to drive away two Confederate cavalry regiments at the mill, but they were repulsed by Brig. Gen. T. Andersons brigade. When Field took Andersons brigade from his right flank, it weakened the line in front of Birneys corps, which moved forward and occupied some of the Confederate entrenchments and captured four guns.(Horn, pp. 127-28; Trudeau, pp. 151-52; Davis, pp. 97-98; Salmon, p. 423.)Although the Union attacks had been generally unsuccessful, they had some of the effect Grant desired. Lee became convinced that the threat against Richmond was a serious one and he dispatched two infantry brigades of Maj. Gen. Mahones division and the cavalry divisions of Maj. Gen. Wade Hampton and W.H.F. Rooney Lee. Hancock ordered Birneys corps to make a night march to join Barlows end of the line. Birneys movement was delayed by difficult terrain for most of August 15 and Hancocks plan for an attack was abandoned for the day.(Trudeau, pp. 153-54; Davis, p. 98; Horn, p. 128; Salmon, p. 423.)On August 16, Greggs cavalry swept to the right and rode northwest on the Charles City Road toward Richmond. They found Rooney Lees cavalry division blocking the road and a full day of fighting resulted. Confederate Brig. Gen. R. Chambliss was killed during the fighting. The infantrymen of the X Corps had a better start to the day, as Brig. Gen. Alfred H. Terrys division broke through the Confederate line. Wrights Brigade was hit hard and retreated, opening a significant gap. The heavily wooded terrain prevented Birney and Hancock from understanding that they had reached a position of advantage and they were unable to exploit it before Field rearranged his lines to fill the gap and drive back the Federals.(Trudeau, pp. 154-57; Horn, pp. 129-31; Kennedy, pp. 356-57; Davis, p. 99; Salmon, p. 423.)Lee planned a counterattack against the Union right for 11 a.m. on August 18, but it was poorly coordinated and made no significant gains. On the night of August 20, Hancock withdrew his force back over the James. Union casualties were approximately 2,900 men, some due to heat stroke. Confederate casualties were 1,500.(Kennedy, p. 357; Trudeau, pp. 160-61, 164, 170; Horn, pp. 131-32; Davis, p. 99; Salmon, p. 424. Casualty figures from Bonekemper, p. 314. Trudeau, p. 170, estimates 2,901 Union, 1,000 Confederate. Salmon, p. 418, and Kennedy, p. 357, estimate 2,900 Union, 1,300 Confederate. Horn, p. 108, estimates 2,901 Union, 1,500 Confederate.)Operations against the Weldon RailroadGlobe Tavern (August 18&ndash;21)While the II Corps fought at Deep Bottom, Grant planned another attack against the Weldon. He chose Gouverneur K. Warrens V Corps to lead the operation. Grant was encouraged by a message he received August 17 from President Lincoln:Grant remarked to his staff, The President has more nerve than any of his advisors.(At dawn on August 18, Warren advanced to the south and reached the railroad at Globe Tavern around 9 a.m. Parts of the division under Brig. Gen. Griffin began to destroy the track while a brigade from Brig. Gen. B. Ayress division formed in line of battle and moved north to block any Confederate advance from that direction. Ayers encountered Confederate troops at about 1 p.m. and Warren ordered the division under Brig. Gen. W. Crawford to move forward on Ayress right in an attempt to outflank the Confederate left. A.P. Hill sent three brigades to meet the advancing Union divisions. At about 2 p.m. they launched a strong attack and pushed the Union troops back to within less than a mile of Globe Tavern. Warren counterattacked and regained his lost ground. His men entrenched for the night.(Davis, p. 101; Trudeau, pp. 162-63; Salmon, p. 424.)Reinforcements arrived during the night&mdash;the Union IX Corps under Maj. Gen. G. Parke, Rooney Lees Confederate cavalry division and three infantry brigades from Mahones division. In the late afternoon of August 19, Mahone launched a flanking attack that found a weak spot in Crawfords line, causing hundreds of Crawfords men to flee in panic. Heth launched a frontal assault against the center and left, which was easily repulsed by Ayress division. The XI Corps counterattacked and fighting ended at dusk. On the night of August 20&ndash;21, Warren pulled his troops back two miles (3 km) to a new line of fortifications, which were connected with the main Union lines on the Jerusalem Plank Road. The Confederates attacked at 9 a.m. on August 21, with Mahone striking the Federal left and Heth the center. Both attacks were unsuccessful against the strong entrenchments and resulted in heavy losses. By 10:30 a.m., the Confederates withdrew.(Trudeau, pp. 164-73; Salmon, pp. 424-25; Davis, pp. 101-04; Eicher, p. 725.)Union casualties at Globe Tavern were 4,296 (251 killed, 1,148 wounded, 2,897 missing/captured), Confederate 1,620 (211 killed, 990 wounded, 419 missing/captured).(Bonekemper, p. 316. Kennedy, p. 360, and Salmon, p. 426, estimate 4,455 Union, 1,600 Confederate. Horn, p. 140, estimates 4,279 Union, about 2,300 Confederates. Eicher cites Union losses as 926 killed and wounded, 2,810 missing or captured.) The Confederates had lost a key section of the Weldon Railroad and were forced to carry supplies by wagon  from the railroad at Stony Creek up the Boydton Plank Road into Petersburg. This was not yet a critical problem for the Confederates. A member of Lees staff wrote, Whilst we are inconvenienced, no material harm is done us. Grant was not entirely satisfied with Warrens victory, which he rightly characterized as wholly defensive in nature.(Davis, p. 104; Trudeau, p. 173.)Second Reams Station (August 25)General Grant wanted the Weldon closed permanently, destroying  of track from Warrens position near Globe Tavern as far south as Rowanty Creek (about  north of the town of Stony Creek). He assigned the operation to Hancocks II Corps, which was in the process of moving south from their operation at Deep Bottom. He chose Hancocks corps because Warren was busy extending the fortifications at Globe Tavern, although his selection was of troops exhausted from their efforts north of the James and their forced march south without rest. Grant augmented Hancocks corps with Greggs cavalry division. Greggs division departed on August 22 and, after driving off Confederate pickets, they and the II Corps infantry division commanded by Brig. Gen. A. Miles destroyed the railroad tracks to within  of Reams Station. Early on August 23, Hancocks other division, commanded by Brig. Gen. Gibbon, occupied Reams Station, taking up positions in earthworks that had been constructed by the Union cavalry during the Wilson-Kautz Raid in June.(Horn, p. 141; Trudeau, pp. 176-79, 182; Kennedy, p. 360; Salmon, pp. 426-27.)Robert E. Lee considered that the Union troops at Reams Station represented not only a threat to his supply line, but also to the county seat of Dinwiddie County; if Dinwiddie Court House were to fall, the Confederates would be forced to evacuate both Petersburg and Richmond because it represented a key point on the armys potential retreat route. He also saw an opportunity&mdash;that he could impose a stinging defeat on the Union Army not long before the presidential election in November. Lee ordered Lt. Gen. Hill to take the overall command of an expedition that included 8&ndash;10,000 men&mdash;both cavalry and infantry.(Trudeau, pp. 179, 181-86; Salmon, p. 428; Davis, p. x; Horn, p. 141.)Maj. Gen. M. Wilcoxs division assaulted the Union position at about 2 p.m. on August 25. Despite launching two attacks, Wilcox was driven back by Miless division, which was manning the northern part of the earthworks. To the south, Gibbons division was blocking the advance of Hamptons cavalry, which had swept around the Union line. Confederate reinforcements from Heths and Mahones divisions arrived while the Confederate artillery softened up the Union position. The final attack began around 5:30 p.m. against Miless position and it broke through the northwest corner of the Union fortifications. Hancock desperately galloped from one threatened point to the next, attempting to rally his men. As he witnessed the men of his once proud corps reluctant to retake their positions from the enemy, he remarked to a colonel, I do not care to die, but I pray God I may never leave this field. By this time, Hamptons cavalry was making progress against Gibbons infantry to the south, launching a surprise dismounted attack that caused many of Gibbons men to flee or surrender. This allowed Hampton to flank Miles. Hancock ordered a counterattack, which provided time to allow for an orderly Union withdrawal to Petersburg after dark.(Salmon, p. 428; Horn, pp. 141-50; Calkins, np.; Kennedy, pp. 360-62; Trudeau, pp. 183-88; Davis, pp. 105-09.)Union casualties at Reams Station were 2,747 (the II Corps lost 117 killed, 439 wounded, 2,046 missing/captured; the cavalry lost 145), Confederate 814 (Hamptons cavalry lost 16 killed, 75 wounded, 3 missing; Hills infantry 720 total).(Trudeau, p. 189. Kennedy, p. 362, cites 2,742 Union casualties, 814 Confederate. Salmon, p. 428, cites 2,700 Union casualties, about 2,000 of which were captured, and about 800 Confederate. Eicher, p. 725, cites Union casualties of 2,372 (with many prisoners), Confederate 720. Horn, p. 151, cites more than 2,700 Union, 720 Confederate. Davis, p. 109, cites 2,400 Union casualties, 2,150 of which were prisoners.) Although the Confederates had won a clear victory, they had lost a vital piece of the Weldon Railroad and from this point on they were able to transport supplies by rail only as far north as Stony Creek Depot,  south of Petersburg. From that point, supplies had to be unloaded and wagon trains had to travel through Dinwiddie Court House and then on the Boydton Plank Road to get the supplies into Petersburg. The South Side Railroad was the only railroad left to supply Petersburg and Lees army.(Trudeau, p. 190; Calkins, np.; Kennedy, p. 362.)Beefsteak Raid (September 14&ndash;17)On September 5, a scout attached to the Jeff Davis Legion, Sgt. George D. Shadburne, gave a report to Wade Hampton on his reconnaissance behind the Union lines. At about 5 miles east of Grants headquarters at City Point, a supply depot at Coggins Point on the James River, he found 3,000 beeves cattle, attended by 120 men and 30 citizens, without arms. Just two days earlier, Robert E. Lee had suggested to Hampton that Grants rear area was open to attack. On September 14, while Grant was in the Shenandoah Valley conferring with Sheridan, Hampton led about 4,000 men in four brigades southwest from Petersburg along the Boydton Plank Road and followed a looping course through Dinwiddie Court House, Stony Creek Station, and by early morning on September 15 had crossed Blackwater Swamp at Cooks Bridge. At 12 a.m. on September 16, Hampton launched an attack in three columns: Rooney Lees division on the left against the Union troops camped at Prince George Court House, the brigade of Brig. Gen. Dearing on the right against Cockes Mill, and the brigade of Brig. Gen. Thomas L. Rosser and a detachment under Lt. Col. Lovick P. Miller in the center to seize the cattle herd. The surprise attacks met only minimal resistance and by 8 a.m., Hamptons men were driving 2,486 cattle south toward Cooks Bridge. A Union attempt by 2,100 cavalrymen under Brig. Gen. Henry Davies, Jr., to intercept the Confederates and their prize was unsuccessful and Hampton retraced his steps back to Petersburg, turning the cattle over to the Confederate commissary department. For days, the Confederate troops feasted on beef and taunted their Union counterparts across the lines. A visitor to Grants headquarters asked the general, When do you expect to starve out Lee and capture Richmond? Grant replied, Never, if our armies continue to supply him with beef cattle.(Trudeau, pp. 195-201; Davis, pp. 110-15.)Union offensives, late SeptemberNew Market Heights (September 29&ndash;30)During the night of September 28&ndash;29, Butlers Army of the James crossed the James River to assault the Richmond defenses north of the river. The columns attacked at dawn. After initial Union successes at New Market Heights and Fort Harrison, the Confederates rallied and contained the breakthrough. Lee reinforced his lines north of the James and, on September 30, he counterattacked unsuccessfully. The Federals entrenched, and the Confederates erected a new line of works cutting off the captured forts. As Grant anticipated, Lee shifted troops to meet the threat against Richmond, weakening his lines at Petersburg.(NPS, Chaffins Farm and New Market Heights.) Peebles Farm (September 30 &ndash; October 2)In combination with Butlers offensive north of the James River, Grant extended his left flank to cut Confederate lines of communication southwest of Petersburg. Two divisions of the IX corps under Maj. Gen. G. Parke, two divisions of the V Corps under Warren, and Greggs cavalry division were assigned to the operation. On September 30, the Federals marched via Poplar Spring Church to reach Squirrel Level and Vaughan Roads. The initial Federal attack overran Fort Archer, flanking the Confederates out of their Squirrel Level Road line. Late afternoon, Confederate reinforcements arrived, slowing the Federal advance. On October 1, the Federals repulsed a Confederate counterattack directed by A.P. Hill. Reinforced by Maj. Gen. Motts division, the Federals resumed their advance on October 2, captured Fort MacRae (which was lightly defended) and extended their left flank to the vicinity of Peebles and Pegrams Farms. With these limited successes, Meade suspended the offensive. A new line was entrenched from the Federal works on Weldon Railroad to Pegrams Farm.(NPS, Peebles Farm.) Actions near Richmond, OctoberDarbytown and New Market Roads (October 7)Responding to the loss of Fort Harrison and the increasing Federal threat against Richmond, Gen. Robert E. Lee directed an offensive against the Union far right flank on October 7. After routing the Federal cavalry from their position covering Darbytown Road, Fields and Hokes divisions assaulted the main Union defensive line along New Market Road and were repulsed. The Federals were not dislodged, and Lee withdrew into the Richmond defenses.(NPS, Darbytown and New Market Roads.)Darbytown Road (October 13)On October 13, Union forces advanced to find and feel the new Confederate defensive line in front of Richmond. While mostly a battle of skirmishers, a Federal brigade assaulted fortifications north of Darbytown Road and was repulsed with heavy casualties. The Federals retired to their entrenched lines along New Market Road.(NPS, Darbytown Road.)Fair Oaks and Darbytown Road (October 27&ndash;28)In combination with movements against the Boydton Plank Road at Petersburg, Benjamin Butler attacked the Richmond defenses along Darbytown Road with the X Corps. The XVIII Corps marched north to Fair Oaks where it was soundly repulsed by Fields Confederate division. Confederate forces counterattacked, taking some 600 prisoners. The Richmond defenses remained intact. Of Grants offensives north of the James River, this was repulsed most easily.(NPS, Fair Oaks and Darbytown Road.)Boydton Plank Road (October 27&ndash;28)Directed by Hancock, divisions from three Union corps (II, V, and IX) and Greggs cavalry division, numbering more than 30,000 men, withdrew from the Petersburg lines and marched west to operate against the Boydton Plank Road and South Side Railroad. The initial Union advance on October 27 gained the Boydton Plank Road, a major campaign objective. But that afternoon, a counterattack near Burgess Mill spearheaded by Henry Heths division, and Wade Hamptons cavalry isolated the II Corps and forced a retreat. The Confederates retained control of the Boydton Plank Road for the rest of the winter. It marked the last battle for Hancock, who resigned from field command because of wounds sustained at Gettysburg.(NPS, Boydton Plank Road.)Hatchers Run (February 5&ndash;7, 1865)On February 5, 1865, Greggs cavalry division rode out to the Boydton Plank Road via Reams Station and Dinwiddie Court House in an attempt to intercept Confederate supply trains. Warrens V Corps crossed Hatchers Run and took up a blocking position on the Vaughan Road to prevent interference with Greggs operations. Two divisions of the II Corps under Maj. Gen. A. Humphreys shifted west to near Armstrongs Mill to cover Warrens right flank. Late in the day, John B. Gordon attempted to turn Humphreys right flank near the mill but was repulsed. During the night, the Federals were reinforced by two divisions. On February 6, Gregg returned to Gravelly Run on Vaughan Road from his unsuccessful raid and was attacked by elements of Brig. Gen. John Pegrams Confederate division. Warren pushed forward a reconnaissance in the vicinity of Dabneys Mill and was attacked by Pegrams and Mahones divisions. Pegram was killed in the action. Although the Union advance was stopped, the Federals extended their siegeworks to the Vaughan Road crossing of Hatchers Run.(NPS, Hatchers Run.)Confederate breakout attempt at Fort Stedman (March 25)By March 1865, Lees army was weakened by desertion, disease, and shortage of supplies and he was outnumbered by Grant by about 125,000 to 50,000. Lee knew that an additional 50,000 men under Sheridan would be returning soon from the Shenandoah Valley and Sherman was marching north through Carolinas to join Grant as well. Lee had Maj. Gen. B. Gordon plan a surprise attack on the Union lines that would force Grant to contract his lines and disrupt his plans to assault the Confederate works (which, unbeknownst to Lee and Gordon, Grant had already ordered for March 29). The attack would be launched with almost half of Lees infantry from Colquitts Salient against Fort Stedman, and Gordon had hopes that he could drive into the Union rear area as far as City Point.(Salmon, p. 448; Korn, pp. 33-34; Greene, pp. 108-12; Horn, p. 209; Trudeau, pp. 333-36.)Gordons attack started at 4:15 a.m. Lead parties of sharpshooters and engineers masquerading as deserting soldiers headed out to overwhelm Union pickets and to remove obstructions that would delay the infantry advance. They were followed by three groups of 100 men assigned to storm the Union works and stream back into the Union rear area. Brig. Gen. B. McLaughlen rode to Fort Haskell, just to the south of Battery XII, which he found to be ready to defend itself. As he moved north, he ordered Battery XII to open fire on Battery XI and a reserve infantry regiment briefly re-captured Battery XI. Assuming that he had sealed the only breach in the line, McLaughlen rode into Fort Stedman and began giving orders to the men. He suddenly realized that they were Confederates and they realized he was a Union general, capturing him.(Trudeau, pp. 337-42; Salmon, p. 450; Korn, pp. 34-36.)Gordon soon arrived at Fort Stedman and found his attack had so far exceeded his most sanguine expectations. Within minutes, Batteries X, XI, and XII and Fort Stedman had been seized, opening a gap nearly  long in the Union line. Gordon turned his attention to the southern flank of his attack and Fort Haskell. The Confederate artillery from Colquitts Salient began bombarding Fort Haskell and the Federal field artillery returned fire, along with the massive siege guns in the rear.(Korn, pp. 36-38; Trudeau, pp. 342-43.)Gordons attack began to founder. His three 100-man detachments were wandering around the rear area in confusion and many had stopped to satisfy their hunger with captured Federal rations. And the main Union defense force was beginning to mobilize. Maj. Gen. G. Parke of the IX Corps acted decisively, ordering the reserve division under Brig. Gen. F. Hartranft to close the gap. Hartranft organized defensive forces that completely ringed the Confederate penetration by 7:30 a.m., stopping it just short of the military railroad depot. The Union artillery, aware that Confederates occupied the batteries and Fort Stedman, launched punishing fire against them. By 7:45 a.m., 4,000 Union troops under Hartranft were positioned in a semicircle of a mile and a half, and counterattacked, causing heavy casualties to the now-retreating Confederates.(Korn, pp. 38-39; Horn, pp. 214-16; Greene, p. 114; Salmon, p. 450; Trudeau, pp. 348-49.)The attack on Fort Stedman had no impact on the Union lines. The Confederate Army was forced to set back its own lines, as the Union attacked further down the front line. To give Gordons attack enough strength to be successful, Lee had weakened his own right flank. The II and VI Corps seized much of the entrenched Confederate picket line southwest of Petersburg, but found the main line still well manned. This Union advance prepared the ground for Grants breakthrough attack in the Battle of Petersburg on April 2, 1865.(Horn, pp. 215-16; Salmon, pp. 467-68.)Union casualties in the Battle of Fort Stedman were 1,044 (72 killed, 450 wounded, 522 missing or captured), Confederate casualties a considerably heavier 4,000 (600 killed, 2,400 wounded, 1,000 missing or captured).(Bonekemper, p. 319. Kennedy, p. 373, and Salmon, p. 450, estimate 1,017 Union, 2,681 Confederate (including 1,949 prisoners). Horn, p. 216, estimates 2,087 Union, about 4,000 Confederate. Korn, p. 39, estimates 1,000 Union (half taken prisoner), 3,500 Confederate (1,900 prisoners). Greene, pp. 114-15, estimates 1,000 Union (more than half taken prisoner), 2,700&ndash;4,000 Confederate.) But more seriously, the Confederate positions were weakened. After the battle, Lees defeat was only a matter of time. His final opportunity to break the Union lines and regain the momentum was gone.(AftermathFile:Petersburg Apr2.png|thumb|300px|Grants final assaults and Lees retreat (start of the Campaign)After nearly ten months of siege, the loss at Fort Stedman was a devastating blow for Lees army, setting up the Confederate defeat at Five Forks on April 1, the Union breakthrough at Petersburg on April 2, the surrender of the city of Petersburg at dawn on April 3, and Richmond that same evening. After his victory at Five Forks, Grant ordered an assault along the entire Confederate line beginning at dawn on April 2. Parkes IX Corps overran the eastern trenches but were met with stiff resistance. At 5:30 a.m. on April 2, Wrights VI Corps made a decisive breakthrough along the Boydton Plank Road line. Wrights initial breakthrough was halted mid-day at Fort Gregg. Gibbons XXIV Corps overran Gregg after a heroic Confederate defense. This halt in the advance into the city of Petersburg allowed Lee to pull his forces out of Petersburg and Richmond on the night of April 2, and head for the west in an attempt to meet up with forces under the command of General E. Johnston in Carolina. The resulting Campaign led to Lees surrender on April 9 at Court House.File:Deadconfederate.jpg|thumb|Confederate soldier killed at Fort Mahone during the final Union assault against the trenches at Petersburg. Photo by C. Roche, April 3, 1865.(Frassanito, p. 360.)Richmond&ndash;Petersburg was a costly campaign for both sides. The initial assaults on Petersburg in June 1864 cost the Union 11,386 casualties, to approximately 4,000 for the Confederate defenders. The casualties for the siege warfare that concluded with the assault on Fort Stedman are estimated to be 42,000 for the Union, and 28,000 for the Confederates.(Bonekemper, p. 323.)Classifying the campaigns Military historians do not agree on precise boundaries between the campaigns of this era. This article uses the classification maintained by the U.S. Park Services American Battlefield Protection Program.(NPS campaigns. The references by Kennedy and Salmon also use this classification.)An alternative classification is maintained by West Point; in their Atlas of American Wars (Esposito, 1959), the Siege of Petersburg ends with the Union assault and breakthrough of April 2. The remainder of the war in Virginia is classified as Grants Pursuit of Lee to Appomattox Court House (3&ndash;9 April 1865).(Esposito, maps 138-44.) Trudeaus Last Citadel conforms to this classification.(Trudeau, pp. 355-98.)See also* National Battlefield* Americans at Siege of PetersburgReferences* Bonekemper, Edward H., III. A Victor, Not a Butcher: Ulysses S. Grants Overlooked Military Genius. Washington, DC: Regnery, 2004. ISBN 0-89526-062-X.*  Davis, William C., and the Editors of Time-Life Books. Death in the Trenches: Grant at Petersburg. Alexandria, VA: Time-Life Books, 1986. ISBN 0-8094-4776-2.*  Eicher, David J. The Longest Night: A Military History of the Civil War. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001. ISBN 0-684-84944-5.* Esposito, Vincent J. West Point Atlas of American Wars. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1959. . The collection of maps (without explanatory text) is available online at the West Point website.* Frassanito, William A. Grant and Lee: The Virginia Campaigns 1864&ndash;1865. New York: Scribner, 1983. ISBN 0-684-17873-7.*  Fuller, Maj. Gen. J. F. C. Grant and Lee, A Study in Personality and Generalship. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1957. ISBN 0-253-13400-5.* Greene, A. Wilson. The Final Battles of the Petersburg Campaign: Breaking the Backbone of the Rebellion. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2008. ISBN 978-1-57233-610-0.* Hattaway, Herman, and Archer Jones. How the North Won: A Military History of the Civil War. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1983. ISBN 0-252-00918-5.* Horn, John. The Petersburg Campaign: June 1864 &ndash; April 1865. Conshohocken, PA: Combined Publishing, 1999. ISBN 978-1-580970-24-2.* Kennedy, Frances H., ed. The Civil War Battlefield Guide. 2nd ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1998. ISBN 0-395-74012-6.* Lankford, Nelson. Richmond Burning: The Last Days of the Confederate Capital. New York: Viking, 2002. ISBN 0-670-03117-8.* Longacre, Edward G. Lincolns Cavalrymen: A History of the Mounted Forces of the Army of the Potomac. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 2000. ISBN 0-8117-1049-1.* Miller, Francis Trevelyan, Robert S. Lanier, and James Verner Scaife, eds. The Photographic History of the Civil War. 10 vols. New York: Review of Reviews Co., 1911. ISBN 0-7835-5726-4.* Salmon, John S. The Official Virginia Civil War Battlefield Guide. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books, 2001. ISBN 0-8117-2868-4.* Sommers, Richard J. Richmond Redeemed: The Siege at Petersburg. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1981. ISBN 0-385-15626-X.(Despite the broad title, Sommers work covers only those battles between September 29 and October 2, 1864.)* Starr, Stephen Z. The Union Cavalry in the Civil War. Vol. 2, The War in the East from Gettysburg to Appomattox 1863&ndash;1865. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1981. ISBN 978-0-8071-3292-0.* Trudeau, Noah Andre. The Last Citadel: Petersburg, Virginia, June 1864 &ndash; April 1865. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1991. ISBN 0-8071-1861-3.* Welcher, Frank J. The Union Army, 1861&ndash;1865 Organization and Operations. Vol. 1, The Eastern Theater. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989. ISBN 0-253-36453-1.* Welsh, Douglas. The Civil War: A Complete Military History. Greenwich, CT: Brompton Books Corporation, 1981. ISBN 1-890221-01-5.* Notes External links*Petersburg Campaign in Encyclopedia Virginia* The Battle of Petersburg: Battle maps, history articles, photos, and preservation news (War Trust)* Animated history of the Siege of Petersburg* Pamplin Historical Park and The National Museum of the Civil War Soldier includes a presentation of the breakthrough at Boydton Line and other museum exhibits.*Beyond the Crater: The Siege of Petersburg Online* VI Corps breakthrough at Petersburgaf Petersburgvon Petersburgde Petersburgdi Petersburgvan Petersburgja:av PetersburgPetersburgapiiritysav Petersburgdch Richmond-Petersburg
79682
Euboea
website         www.naevias.grEuboea(Euboea, Euboia, and Euboaea  are transliterations from the Greek  , while Evvoia, Evvia, and Eviareflect the Greek pronunciation .) (, via; , Eboia) is the second largest Greek island in area and population, after Crete. The narrow Strait separates it from Boeotia in mainland Greece. In general outline it is a long and narrow, seahorse-shaped island; it is about  long, and varies in breadth from  to . Its general direction is from northwest to southeast, and it is traversed throughout its length by a mountain range, which forms part of the chain that bounds Thessaly on the east, and is continued south of Euboea in the lofty islands of Andros, Tinos and Mykonos.GeographyFile:Euboea NE.jpg|thumb|Satellite picture showing central and south-eastern Euboea at the top, and the Greek mainland (Attica and Boeotia) in the lower portion. Orientation: north-east uppermost.Like most of the Greek islands, Euboea was originally known under other names in ancient times, such as Macris and Doliche from its shape, Ellopia and Abantis from the tribes inhabiting it.Euboea was believed to have originally formed part of the mainland, and to have been separated from it by an earthquake. This is fairly probable, because it lies in the neighbourhood of a fault line, and both Thucydides and Strabo write that the northern part of the island had been shaken at different periods. In the neighbourhood of Chalcis, both to the north and the south, the bays are so confined as to make plausible the story of Agamemnons fleet having been detained there by contrary winds. At Chalcis itself, where the strait is narrowest at only 40 m, it is called the Strait. The extraordinary changes of tide which take place in this passage have been a subject of note since classical times. At one moment the current runs like a river in one direction, and shortly afterwards with equal velocity in the other. A bridge was first constructed here in the twenty-first year of the War (410 BC). The name Euripus developed during the Ages into Evripo and Egripo, and in this latter form transferred to the whole island. Later the Venetians, when they occupied the district, altered it to Negroponte, referring to the bridge which connected it with the mainland.The main mountains include Dirphys (1,745 m), Pyxaria (1,341 m) in the northeast and Ochi (1,394). The neighboring gulfs are the Gulf in the north, Gulf, Euboean Gulf in the west, the Euboic Sea and the Gulf. At the 2001 census the island had a population of 198,130, and a total land area of 3,684.848 km.HistoryAncientThe history of the island is for the most part that of its two principal cities, Chalcis and Eretria. Both cities were Ionian settlements from Attica, and their importance in early times is shown by their numerous colonies in Graecia and Sicily, such as Cumae and Rhegium, and on the coast of Macedonia. In this way, they opened new trade routes to the Greeks, and extended the field of western civilization.(Lane Fox, Robin. Travelling Heroes (London: Penguin, 2008)  passim)The strength of their commerce is shown by the fact that the Euboic scale of weights and measures was used in Athens until Solon, and among the Ionic cities generally. They were rival cities, and appear to have been equally powerful at first; one of the earliest of the sea battles mentioned in Greek history took place between them, and it is also said  that many of the other Greek states took part.In 490 BC, Eretria was utterly ruined and its inhabitants were transported to Persia. Though it was restored after the of Marathon, on a site at a little distance from its original position, it never regained its former eminence, but it was still the second city on the island. From this time, its neighbour, Chalcis, held an undisputed supremacy. Already, however, this city had suffered from the growing power of Athens. In 506 BC, the Chalcidians were totally defeated by the Athenians, who established 4,000 Attic settlers on their lands, and seem to have reduced the whole island to a condition of dependence.Again, in 446 BC, when Euboea endeavoured to throw off the yoke, it was once more reduced by Pericles, and a new body of settlers was planted at Histiaea in the north of the island, after the inhabitants of that town had been expelled. The Athenians fully recognized its importance to them, for supplying them with grain (i.e., wheat) and cattle, securing their commerce, and guaranteeing them against piracy, because its proximity to the coast of Attica rendered it extremely dangerous to them when in other hands. However, in 410 BC, the island succeeded in regaining its independence. After this, it took sides with one or other of the leading states, until, after the Battle of Chaeronea, it passed into the hands of II of Macedon, and finally into those of the Romans.MedievalIn 1157 all the coastal towns of Euboea were destroyed by a Sicilian force.(Norwich, John Julius. Byzantium: The Decline and Fall (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1996) p. 116)In the Middle Ages, Euboea came into prominence following the Crusade. In the partition of the Empire by the crusaders, the island was occupied by a number of Lombard families, who divided it into three (later six) baronies. The islands rulers came early on under the influence of the Republic, which secured control of the islands commerce in the of the Euboeote Succession and gradually expanded its control, until they acquired full sovereignty by 1390.On 12 July 1470, during the OttomanVenetian War of 14631479 and after a protracted and bloody siege, the well-fortified city of Negropont (Chalkis) was wrested from Venice by II and the whole island fell into the hands of the Empire. Although the name Negropont remained current in European languages until the 19th century, the Turks themselves renamed the city and the island Eriboz or Ariboz from their word for the Strait. Under Ottoman rule, Ariboz was the seat of a sanjak. At the conclusion of the War of Independence in 1830, the island constituted a part of the newly-established independent Greek kingdom. ModernEuboea is linked to the mainland by two bridges, one that runs through Chalkis and is also accessible from Thebes, and another which bypasses Chalcis and is accessed from Athens. All of Euboeas modern bridges are suspended.In the 1980s, the Dystos lake was filled with grass which was set on fire by farmers to make more farmland. This act caused devastation of much of the plants and the environment in that area. A part of the lake later regenerated. Also the municipalities of Anthidona and Avlida in the mid to late 20th century, which once were part of the eastern part of the Prefecture, reverted to Chalkis. Since then, the postal codes corresponded with the rest of Euboea, including Skyros.RecentOn January 24 through January 28, 2006, a snowstorm which also affected Eastern Europe brought heavy snowfalls with snow accumulating to heights ranging from , cutting off roads from the rest of Greece in the northern, eastern and southern parts of the island. Electricity was cut off to parts of the island for several days. Two days later when the snowstorm tapered off, villages in the south and north remained cut off from roads and supply. Communications were later restored as bulldozers cleared away the snow as far as Aliveri a day later. The snowstorm became one of the worst in the islands history. Another system arrived on February 7, 2005 and brought heavy snows that isolated several residents in their homes with  of snow, enough to reach upper balconies and almost cover homes in snow over their roofs in several villages. In Kampia, snowfall of up to  covered peoples cars, and some people had to dig away the snow to get into their vehicles. Roads were also blocked and some locations were cut off from the rest of the island. The storm did not cause blackouts. A day later, temperatures began to rise and roads were re-opened and communications restored.Another natural disaster was the forest fire that occurred in the Aliveri part of the island, fires lasted in July 2007 and devastated much of the forests including the vicinity of the hotel and devastated the tourist industry of the island.  Fires battled for a few days until the situation ended completely.  Hundreds of buildings were damaged..On October 14, 2008, a tremendous earthquake rumbled the island, measuring 6.6 on the Richter scale. Four months after, the Achaia-Ilia earthquake measured at the same range, mostly the same measurement.  The earthquake was even felt in Athens and parts of the mainland.DemographicsThe population of the island according to the census of 2001 was 198,130, making it the second most populous island of Greece. As a whole the Euboeans share a cultural identity similar to that of the people in the rest of Greece and they speak a southern variety of Greek. In the southern part of the island there are Arvanite communities, with the area south of Aliveri being the northernmost limit of their presence in Euboea. Sarakatsani and Vlachs could be found mainly in the mountainous areas in central and northern Euboea respectively, but nowadays they have abandoned the nomadic way of life and live permanently in the towns and villages across the island.EconomicsThe mining areas include magnesite in Mantoudi and Limni, lignite in Aliveri and iron and nickel from Dirfys. Marble is mined 3 km north of Eretria which include Chalcidicum and asbestos in the northeastern part of Carystus in the mountain.The trees include chestnuts.Transport*National Road 44, Cen., S, SE*National Road 77 NW, N, W, Cen.Local administrationThe island belongs to Prefecture which also includes two municipalities on the mainland, Anthidona and Avlida, as well as the island municipality of Skyros. At the 2001 census the prefecture had a population of 215,136 inhabitants, whereas the island itself had a population of 198,130. The prefectures land area is 4,167.449 km, whereas the total land area of the municipalities actually on the island is 3,684.848 km, which includes that of numerous small offshore islets (Islands) near Euboeas southeastern tip. Wildfires The Greek fires were some of the deadliest in world history, killing at least 64 people in the Peloponnese and Evia.Notable people*Kallias (9 July 1901- 7 April 2004), politician*Papanikolaou (1883&ndash;1962) physician, a pioneer in cytology and early cancer detection*Skarimpas, writer*Kriezotis, leader of the Greek Revolution in Euboea*David of Euboea, 16th Century Saint (from the village of Gardinitsa) who built a church dedicated to the Transfiguration*Porphyrios, Holy Father of the Orthodox Church*Iakovos, Spiritual Father of St. Davids Monastery in EuboeaSporting teams*Khalkis-Lilas - Chalkida, third division*BC - Chalkida, Greek A2 LeagueSee also*of settlements in the Euboea prefecture*of traditional Greek place namesReferences*External links*Official site - English version*Photos from Euboea, Evoiaar:be:br:Euboiabg:cs:Euboiade:Eubaet:Euboiael:es:Eubeaeo:Ebeoeu:Eubeafr:Eube- ko:hr:Eubejaid:Euboiait:Eubea()ku:Euboiala:Euboealt:Eubojahu:vianl:Euboeaja:no:Evviann:vviapl:Eubeapt:Eubeiaro:Eviaru:scn:Eubbeasimple:Euboeask:Eubjasr:sh:Eubejafi:Euboiasv:Euboiath:tr:Eribozuk:vec:Negropontewar:Euboiazh:
80207
Sodium_chloride
 ChemSpiderID  5044| Section2  | Section3   Coordination  Octahedral (Na+)Octahedral (Cl)| Section4  | Section5   LD50  30008000 mg/kg (oral in rats, mice, rabbits)()| Section6  }}Sodium chloride, also known as salt,  common salt, table salt or halite, is an compound with the formula NaCl. Sodium chloride is the salt most responsible for the salinity of the ocean and of the fluid of many multicellular organisms. As the major ingredient in salt, it is commonly used as a condiment and food preservative.PropertiesSodium chloride forms crystals with face-centered cubic symmetry. In these, the larger chloride ions are arranged in a cubic close-packing, while the smaller sodium ions, fill all the cubic gaps (octahedral voids) between them. Each ion is surrounded by six ions of the other kind; the surrounding ions are located at the vertices of a regular octahedron.This same basic structure is found in many other minerals and is commonly known as the halite or rock-salt crystal structure. It can be represented as a face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice with a two-atom basis or as two interpenetrating face centered cubic lattices.The first atom is located at each lattice point, and the second atom is located half way between lattice points along the fcc unit cell edge.conductivity of pure NaCl as a function of temperature has a maximum of 2.03 W/(cm K) at 8 K and decreases to 0.069 at 314 K (41 C). It also decreases with doping.()Small particles of salt are the dominant condensation nuclei well out at sea, which allow the formation of clouds in otherwise non-polluted air.()ProductionFile:Salt mine 0096.jpg|thumb|left|Modern rock salt mine near Mount Morris, York, StatesSalt is currently mass-produced by evaporation of seawater or brine from other sources, such as wells and salt lakes, and by mining rock salt, called halite. The United States had been the worlds leading salt producer until 2005, when it was surpassed by China.(Dennis S. Kostick Salt, U.S. Geological Survey, 2008 Minerals Yearbook) In 2010, world production was estimated at 270 million tonnes, the top five producers (in million tonnes) being China (60.0), United States (45.0), Germany (16.5), India (15.8) and Canada (14.0).(Salt, U.S. Geological Survey)UsesIn addition to the familiar uses of salt in cooking, salt is also used in many applications, from manufacturing pulp and paper, to setting dyes in textiles and fabric, to producing soaps, detergents, and other bath products. It is the major source of industrial chlorine and hydroxide, and used in almost every industry.(Sodium chloride is sometimes used as a cheap and safe desiccant because of its hygroscopic properties, making salting an effective method of preservation historically; the salt draws water out of bacteria through pressure, keeping it from reproducing, a major source of food spoilage. Even though more effective desiccants are available, few are safe for humans to ingest.The distribution of salt consumption in the US in 2008 was as follows: ice control 43%; chemicals 35%; wholesale and retail sales 8%; agricultural, food processing, general industrial, and primary water treatment applications consume 3% each. The amounts used for ice control vary significantly over time due to weather fluctuations that strongly affects the salt price.(Road saltWhile salt was once a scarce commodity in history, industrialized production has now made salt plentiful. Approximately 51% of world output is now used by cold countries to de-ice roads in winter, both in bins and spread by service vehicles. chloride is preferred over sodium chloride, as CaCl2 releases energy upon forming a solution with water, heating any ice or snow it is in contact with. It also lowers the freezing point, depending on the concentration (see image and data table). Whereas the minimum freezing point is 21.12 C for 23.31 wt% of salt, the freezing near this concentration is so slow that the point of 22.4 C can be reached with about 25 wt% of salt.(Elvers, B. et al. (ed.) (1991) Ullmanns Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 5th ed. Vol. A24, Wiley, ISBN 978-3527201242 p. 319) NaCl does not release heat upon solution; however, it does lower the freezing point. Calcium chloride is thought to be more environmentally friendly than sodium chloride when used to de-ice roads, however a drawback is that it tends to promote corrosion (of vehicles) more so than sodium chloride. NaCl is also more readily available and does not have any special handling or storage requirements, unlike calcium chloride.Salt also is added to secure the soil and to provide firmness to the foundation on which highways are built. The salt acts to minimize the effects of shifting caused in the subsurface bychanges in humidity and traffic load.(AdditivesMost table salt sold for consumption is not pure sodium chloride. In 1911, carbonate was first added to salt to make it flow more freely.() In 1924, trace amounts of iodine in form of sodium iodide, iodide or iodate were first added, to reduce the incidence of simple goiter.()Salt for de-icing in the United Kingdom predominantly comes from a single mine in Winsford in Cheshire. Prior to distribution it has an anti-caking agent added: sodium hexacyanoferrate(II) at less than 100 ppm. This treatment enables rock salt to flow freely out of the gritting vehicles despite being stockpiled prior to use. In recent years this additive has also been used in table salt.Other additives had been used in road salt to reduce the total costs. For example, a byproduct carbohydrate solution from sugar beet processing was mixed with rock salt and adhered to road surfaces about 40% better than loose rock salt alone. Because it stayed on the road longer, the treatment did not have to be repeated several times, saving time and money.(Environmental effectRoad salt ends up in fresh water bodies and could harm aquatic plants and animals by disrupting their osmoregulation ability.(Does road salt harm the environment?) The omnipresence of salt poses a problem in any coastal coating application, as trapped salts cause great problems in adhesion. Naval authorities and ship builders monitor the salt concentrations on surfaces during construction. Maximum salt concentrations on surfaces are dependent on the authority and application. The IMO regulation is mostly used and sets salt levels to a maximum of 50 mg/m2 soluble salts measured as sodium chloride. These measurements are done by means of a test.In highway deicing, salt has been associated with corrosion of bridge decks, motor vehicles, reinforcement bar and wire, and unprotected steel structures used in road construction. Surface runoff, vehicle spraying, and windblown actions also affect soil, roadside vegetation, and local surface water and groundwater supplies. Although evidence of environmental loading of salthas been found during peak usage, the spring rains and thaws usually dilute the concentrations of sodium in the area where salt was applied.(IndustryThe industrial uses of salt include, in descending order of quantity consumed, various applications, oil and gas exploration, textiles and dyeing, pulp and paper, metal processing, tanning and leather treatment, and rubber manufacture.(In oil and gas exploration, salt is an important component of drilling fluids in well drilling. It is used to flocculate and increase the density of the drilling fluid to overcome high downwell gas pressures. Whenever a drill hits a salt formation, salt is added to the drilling fluid to saturate the solution and to minimize the dissolution within the salt stratum. Salt is also used to increase the set rate of concrete in cemented casings.(In textiles and dyeing, salt is used as a brine rinse to separate organic contaminants, to promote salting out of dyestuff precipitates, and to blend with concentrated dyes to standardize them. One of its main roles is to provide the positive ion charge to promote the absorption of negatively charged ions of dyes.(In metal processing, salt is used in concentrating uranium ore into uranium oxide (cake). It also is used in processing aluminium, beryllium, copper, steel and vanadium. In the and paper industry, salt is used to bleach wood pulp. It also is used to make chlorate, which is added along with acid and water to manufacture dioxide, an excellent oxygen-based bleaching chemical. The chlorine dioxide process, which originated in Germany after World War I, is becoming more popular because of environmental pressures to reduce or eliminate chlorinated bleaching compounds. In tanning and leather treatment, salt is added to animal hides to inhibit microbial activity on the underside of the hides and to attract moisture back into the hides.(In rubber manufacture, salt is used to make buna, neoprene and white rubber types. Salt brine and sulfuric acid are used to coagulate an emulsified latex made from chlorinated butadiene. Industrially, elemental chlorine is predominantly produced by the electrolysis of sodium chloride dissolved in water.( Along with chlorine, this process yields hydrogen gas and hydroxide, according to the equation:2 NaCl + 2 H2O  Cl2 + H2 + 2 NaOHThe thus produced chlorine is used in the synthesis of various chemicals such as PVC, pesticides and epoxy resins.( Furthermore, sodium metal is produced commercially through the electrolysis of liquid sodium chloride. This is now done in a Downs cell in which sodium chloride is mixed with chloride to lower the melting point below 700 C. As calcium is more electropositive than sodium, no calcium will be formed at the cathode. This method is less expensive than the previous method of electrolyzing sodium hydroxide. In the process, sodium chloride is used for producing carbonate and chloride. In the process and in the process, it is used for the production of sulfate and acid.OpticsDefect-free NaCl crystals have an optical transmittance of about 90% between 200 nm and 20 m. They were therefore used in optical components (windows and prisms) operating in the infrared spectral range, where few non-absorbing alternatives exist and where requirements for absence of microscopic inhomogeneities are less strict than in the visible range. While inexpensive, NaCl crystals are soft and hygroscopic  when exposed to the ambient air they gradually cover with frost. This limits application of NaCl to dry environments or for short-term uses such as prototyping. Nowadays materials like selenide (ZnSe), which are stronger mechanically and are less sensitive to moisture, are used instead of NaCl for the IR spectral range.Food industry, medicine and agricultureMany organisms cannot live in an overly salty environment: water is drawn out of their cells by osmosis. For this reason salt is used to preserve some foods, such as smoked bacon or fish. It can also be used to detach leeches that have attached themselves to feed. It is also used to disinfect wounds.Salt is added in most food items, by the food processor or by the consumer, as a flavor enhancer, preservative, binder, fermentation-control additive, texture-control agent and colordeveloper. The salt consumption in the food industry is subdivided, in descending order of consumption, into other food processing, meat packers, canning, baking, dairy and grain mill products. Salt is added to promote color development in bacon, ham and other processed meat products. As a preservative, salt inhibits the growth of bacteria. Salt acts as a binder in sausages to form a binding gel made up of meat, fat, and moisture. Salt also acts as a flavor enhancer and as a tenderizer.(In the dairy industry, salt is added to cheese as a color-, fermentation-, and texture-control agent. The dairy subsector includes companies that manufacture creamery butter, condensed and evaporated milk, frozen desserts, ice cream, natural and processed cheese, and specialty dairy products. In canning, salt is primarily added as a flavor enhancer and preservative. It also is used as a carrier for other ingredients, dehydrating agent, enzyme inhibitor and tenderizer.In baking, salt is added to control the rate of fermentation in bread dough. It also is used to strengthen the gluten (the elastic protein-water complex in certain doughs) and as a flavorenhancer, such as a topping on baked goods. The food-processing category also contains grain millproducts. These products consist of milling flour and rice and manufacturing cereal breakfast food and blended or prepared flour. Salt is also used a seasoning agent, e.g. in potato chips, pretzels, cat and dog food.(Sodium chloride is used in veterinary medicine as emesis causing agent. It is given as warm saturated solution. Emesis can also be caused by pharyngeal placement of small amount of plain salt or salt crystals.FirefightingSodium chloride is the principal extinguishing agent in fire extinguishers (Met-L-X, Super D) used on combustible metal fires such as magnesium, potassium, sodium, and NaK alloys (Class D). Thermoplastic powder is added to the mixture, along with waterproofing (metal stearates) and anti-caking materials (tricalcium phosphate) to form the extinguishing agent. When it is applied to the fire, the salt acts like a heat sink, dissipating heat from the fire, and also forms an oxygen-excluding crust to smother the fire. The plastic additive melts and helps the crust maintain its integrity until the burning metal cools below its ignition temperature. This type of extinguisher was invented in the late 1940s in the cartridge-operated type shown here, although stored pressure versions are now popular. Common sizes are 30 lb portable and 350 lb wheeled.HouseholdSince at least medieval times, people have used salt as a cleansing agent rubbed on household surfaces. It is also used in many brands of shampoo, toothpaste and popularly to de-ice driveways and patches of ice.water contains excessive calcium and magnesium ions that contribute to the buildup of a scale or film of alkaline mineral deposits in household and industrial equipment and pipes. Commercial and residential water-softening units use salt to remove the ions that cause the hardness. The sodium ions captured on a resin bed are exchanged for the calcium and magnesium ions.(Biological functionsIn humans, a high-salt intake has long been suspected to generally raise blood pressure. More recently, it was demonstrated to attenuate oxide production. Nitric oxide (NO) contributes to vessel homeostasis by inhibiting vascular smooth muscle contraction and growth, platelet aggregation, and leukocyte adhesion to the endothelium.()()File:Dead-Sea---Salt-Evaporation-Ponds.jpg| Jordanian and Israeli salt evaporation ponds at the south end of the Sea.File:Piles of Salt Salar de Uyuni Bolivia Luca Galuzzi 2006 a.jpg|Mounds of salt, de Uyuni, Bolivia.File:Aigues-Mortes2.jpg|Evaporation lagoons, Aigues-Mortes, France.See also*Biosalinity*Namak*Halite, the mineral form of sodium chloride*Salinity*Salt*Soap*the earthReferencesExternal links*The Salt Manufacturers Association website*Salt Institute website*Salt Archive website*Salt States Geological Survey Statistics and Information**  Salt Intake in Cold Weather*Oxford MSDS*JtBaker MSDSam:Xloridhloridde sodisodncy:Halenda:Natriumkloridde:Natriumchloridet:Naatriumkloriidde sodiokloridoklorurode sodiumde sodiokloridkloridais:Borsaltdi sodioka:chloridumhlordschloridashu:Ntrium-kloridkloridanl:Natriumchlorideja:no:Koksaltnds:Natriumchloridsodude sdiokachidi sodiusaltsodnfi:Tiesuolasv:Natriumkloridth:cloruafiu-vro:Keedosuuldes voyeszh:
81236
Glendalough
Glendalough () is a glacial valley located in Wicklow, Ireland, renowned for its Early Medieval monastic settlement founded in the 6th century by St Kevin, a hermit priest, and destroyed in 1398 by English troops.History of GlendaloughKevin, a descendant of one of the ruling families in Leinster, studied as a boy under the care of three holy men, Eoghan, Lochan, and Eanna.  During this time, he went to Glendalough.  He was to return later, with a small group of monks to found a monastery where the two rivers form a confluence. Kevins writings discuss his fighting knights at Glendalough; scholars today believe this refers to his process of self-examination and his personal temptations.(Glendalough)  His fame as a holy man spread and he attracted numerous followers. He died in about 618.  For six centuries afterwards, Glendalough flourished and the Irish Annals contain references to the deaths of abbots and raids on the settlement.(Glendalough Visitors Guide, Produced by The Office of Public Works (Oifig na nOibreacha Poibli), Glendalough, County Wicklow.)At the Synod of Rath Breasail in 1111, Glendalough was designated as one of the two dioceses of North Leinster.Book of Glendalough was written there about 1131.St. Laurence OToole, born in 1128, became of Glendalough and was well known for his sanctity and hospitality.  Even after his appointment as Archbishop of Dublin in 1162, he returned occasionally to Glendalough, to the solitude of St. Kevins Bed.  He died in Eu, in Normandy in 1180.(In 1214, the dioceses of Glendalough and Dublin were united. From that time onwards, the cultural and ecclesiastical status of Glendalough diminished.  The destruction of the settlement by English forces in 1398 left it a ruin but it continued as a church of local importance and a place of pilgrimage.Glendalough features on the 1598 map A Modern Depiction of Ireland, One of the British Isles by Ortelius as Glandalag.Descriptions of Glendalough from the 18th and 19th centuries include references to occasions of riotous assembly on the feast of St. Kevin on 3 June.(The present remains in Glendalough tell only a small part of its story.  The monastery in its heyday included workshops, areas for manuscript writing and copying, guest houses, an infirmary, farm buildings and dwellings for both the monks and a large lay population.  The buildings which survive probably date from between the 10th and 12th centuries.(Titular SeeGlendalough is currently a see in the Catholic Church. It is used for bishops who hold no ordinary power of their own and thus are bishops.(Catholic Hierarchy List of Titular Bishops of Glenndlocha)Titular Bishops* Raymond DMello (20 December 1969 - 24 November 1971)* Marian Przykucki (12 December 1973 - 15 June 1981)* Murray (4 March 1982 - 10 February 1996)* Martin (5 December 1998 - 3 May 2003 )*Sansaricq (6 June 2006 - )(Monuments in the Lower ValleyThe GatewayThe Gateway to the monastic city of Glendalough is one of the most important monuments, now totally unique in Ireland.  It was originally two-storied with two fine, granite arches.  The antae or projecting walls at each end suggest that it had a timber roof.  Inside the gateway, in the west wall, is a cross-inscribed stone.  This denoted sanctuary, the boundary of the area of refuge.  The paving of the causeway in the monastic city is still preserved in part but very little remains of the enclosure wall.(The Round Towerleft|thumb|The Round Tower at Glendalough.This fine tower, built of mica-slate interspersed with granite is about 30 metres high, with an entrance 3.5 metres from the base.  The conical roof was rebuilt in 1876 using the original stones.  The tower originally had six timber floors, connected by ladders.  The four storeys above entrance level are each lit by a small window; while the top storey has four windows facing the cardinal compass points. Round towers, landmarks for approaching visitors, were built as towers, but also served on occasion as store-houses and as places of refuge in times of attack.(The CathedralThe largest and most imposing of the buildings at Glendalough, the cathedral had several phases of construction, the earliest, consisting of the present nave with its antae.  The large mica-shist stones which can be seen up to the height of the square-headed west doorway were re-used from an earlier smaller church.  The chancel and sacristy date from the late 12th and early 13th centuries.  The chancel arch and east window were finely decorated, through many of the stones are now missing.  The north doorway to the nave also dates from this period.  Under the southern window of the chancel is an ambry or wall cupboard and a piscina, a basin used for washing the sacred vessels.  A few metres south of the cathedral an early cross of local granite, with an unpierced ring, is commonly known as St. Kevins Cross.(The Priests HouseAlmost totally reconstructed from the original stones, based on a 1779 sketch made by Beranger, the Priests House is a small Romanesque building, with a decorative arch at the east end.  It gets its name from the practice of interring priests there in the 18th and 19th centuries.  Its original purpose is unknown although it may have been used to house relics of St. Kevin.(St. Kevins Church or Kitchenthumb|Saint Kevins Church.This stone-roofed building originally had a nave only, with entrance at the west end and a small round-headed window in the east gable.  The upper part of the window can be seen above what became the chancel arch, when the chancel (now missing) and the sacristy were added later.  The steep roof, formed of overlapping stones, is supported internally by a semi-circular vault.  Access to the croft or roof chamber was through a rectangular opening towards the western end of the vault.  The church also had a timber first floor.  The belfry with its conical cap and four small windows rises from the west end of the stone roof in the form of a miniature round tower.(St. Kierans ChurchThe remains of this nave-and-chancel church were uncovered in 1875.  The church probably commemorates St. Kieran, the founder of Clonmacnoise, a monastic settlement that had associations with Glendalough during the 10th century.(St. Marys or Our Ladys ChurchOne of the earliest and best constructed of the churches, St. Marys or Our Ladys Church consists of a nave with a later chancel.  Its granite west doorway with an architrave, has inclined jambs and a massive lintel.  The under-side of the lintel is inscribed with an unusual saltire or x-shaped cross.  The East window is round-headed, with a moulding and two very worn carved heads on the outside.(Trinity ChurchA simple nave-and-chancel church, with a fine chancel arch.  Trinity Church is beside the main road.  A square-headed doorway in the west gable leads into a later annexe, possibly a sacristy.  A Round Tower or belfry was constructed over a vault in this chamber.  This fell in a storm in 1818.  The doorway inserted in the south wall of the nave also dates from this period.  Projecting corbels at the gables would have carried the verge timbers of the roof.(St. Saviours ChurchThe most recent of the Glendalough churches, St. Saviours was built in the 12th century, probably at the time of St. Laurence OToole.  The nave and chancel with their fine decorate stones were restored in the 1870s using stones found on the site.  The Romanesque chancel arch has three orders, with highly ornamented capitals.  The east window has two round-headed lights.  Its decorated features include a serpent, a lion, and two birds holding a human head between their beaks.  A staircase in the eastern wall leading from an adjoining domestic building would have given access to a room over the chancel.(Monuments near the Upper LakeReefert ChurchSituated in a grove of trees, this nave-and-chancel church dates from around 1100.  Most of the surrounding walls are modern.  The name derives from Righ Fearta, the burial place of the Kings.  The church, built in simple style, has a granite doorway with sloping jambs and flat lintel and a granite chancel arch.  The projecting corbels at each gable carried verge timbers for the roof.  East of the church are two crosses of note, one with an elaborate interlace pattern.  On the other side of the Poulanass River, close to Reefert are the remains of another small church.(St. Kevins CellBuilt on a rocky spur over the lake, this stone structure was 3.6 metres in diameter with walls 0.9 metres thick and a doorway on the east side.  Only the foundations survive today and it is possible that the cell had a stone-corbelled roof, similar to the beehive huts on Michael, Kerry.(The CaherThis stone-walled circular enclosure on the level ground between the two lakes is 20 metres in diameter and is of unknown date.  Close by, are several crosses, apparently used as stations on the pilgrims route.(Temple-na-Skellig and St. Kevins BedThis small rectangular church on the southern shore of the Upper Lake is accessible only by boat, via a series of steps from the landing stage.  West of the church is a raised platform with stone enclosure walls, where dwelling huts probably stood.  The church, partly rebuilt in the 12th century, has a granite doorway with inclined jambs.  At the east gable is an inscribed Latin Cross together with several plain grave slabs and three small crosses.  Close by is St. Kevins Bed, a cave in the rock face about 8 metres above the level of the Upper Lake and reputedly a retreat for St. Kevin and later for St. Laurence OToole.  Partly man-made, it runs back 2 metres into the rock.(GeographyThe valley was formed during the last age by a glacier which left a moraine across the valley mouth. The Poulanass river, which plunges into the valley from the south, created a delta, which eventually divided the original lake in two.()Vegetation and Natural ResourcesGlendalough is surrounded by semi-natural oak woodland.  Much of this was formerly coppiced (cut to the base at regular intervals) to produce wood, charcoal and bark.  In the springtime, the oakwood floor is carpeted with a display of bluebells, wood sorrel and wood anemones.  Other common plants are woodrush, bracken, polypody fern and various species of mosses.  The understorey is largely of holly, hazel and mountain ash.At the west end of the Upper Lake lie the ruins of an abandoned miners village normally accessible only by foot. The mining of lead took place here from 1850 until about 1957 but the mines in the valley of Glendalough were smaller and less important than those around the Glendasan Valley, from which they are separated by Camaderry Mountain. In 1859 the Glendasan and Glendalough mines were connected with each other by a series of adits, now flooded, through the mountain. This made it easier to transport ore from Glendalough and process it there.RecreationThere are many walking trails of varying difficulty around Glendalough. Within the valley itself there are nine colour-coded walking trails maintained by Mountains National Park.  They all begin at an information office located near the Upper Lake where maps are available to purchase. There are also a number of guided walk options, with companies such as Walkabout Wicklow offering fully guided tours of the Spinc Walk, the most popular trail in Glendalough.The Way, a long distance waymarked walking trail, passes through Glendalough on its way from Rathfarnham in the north to its southerly point of Clonegal in Carlow.thumb|center|800px|The Upper Lake at Glendalough.Rock Climbingup the steep corner of Sarcophagus at Glendalough.Glendaloughs granite cliffs, situated on the hillside above the north-western end of the valley, have been a popular rock-climbing location since the first climbs were established in 1948. The current guidebook, published in 1993, lists about 110 routes, at all grades up to E5/6a, though several more climbs, mainly in the high grades, have been recorded since then.()The climbs vary between one and four pitches, and up to over 100m in length. There are several sectors:* Twin Buttress, a large buttress divided in the middle by a seasonal waterfall, which contains the most popular climbs. This area is approached via the zig-zag path at the head of the valley.* The Upper Cliffs, a band of cliffs high up on the hillside east of Twin Buttress.* Acorn Buttress, a small buttress just below Twin Buttress, which is a popular base-camp location.* Hobnail Buttress, a small buttress with some easy climbing, on the hillside one kilometre to the east.The quality of the climbing along with the variety of grades attracts climbers of all standards to Glendalough, and makes it a favourite destination for Dublin climbers in particular. The Mountaineering Club has operated a climbing hut in the area since the 1950s.  Below the crag is an extensive boulder field. This is a popular location for bouldering activities,(TheShortSpan - Bouldering in Ireland) the boulders within easy reach of the path being especially popular.GalleryImage:Glendalough.jpg|Lower Lake.Image:Glendalough4259.JPG|Upper Lake.Image:Glendalough round tower.jpg|Round tower.Image:Stkevinschurch2.jpg|St. Kevins ChurchImage:Irl 1sh airmail.jpg|1949 one shilling Irish stamp with Vox Hiberniae flying over Gleann D Lo.Image:Glendalough upper lake.jpg|Upper lake and valleySee also*of Glendalough*of Glendalough*round tower*Saint Kevin*List of abbeys and priories in County Wicklow*List of climbing areas in IrelandReferencesExternal links*Glendalough walks*Megalithic Irelands Glendalough Monastic Site*Monastic buildings of Glendalough*Glendalough Guided Walks*360 View from Glendaloughcs:Glendaloughda:Glendaloughde:Glendaloughes:Glendalougheo:Glendalougheu:Glendaloughfr:GlendaloughD Lochit:GlendaloughGlendalochensishu:Glendaloughnl:Glendaloughno:Glendaloughpl:Glendaloughrm:Glendaloughru:sh:Glendaloughsv:Glendalough()
82019
Mariposa_County,_California
 footnotes                   Mariposa County is a county in the state of California, located in the western foothills of the Sierra Nevada mountains. It lies north of Fresno, east of Merced, and southeast of Stockton. As of the 2010 census, the population was 18,251 up from 17,130 at the 2000 census.  The seat is Mariposa.The countys eastern half is the central portion of National Park.There are no incorporated cities in Mariposa County; however, there are three communities recognized as places for statistical purposes. It also has the distinction of having no permanent traffic lights anywhere in the county.HistoryMariposa County was one of the original counties of California, created at the time of statehood in 1850. While it began as the states largest county, over time territory that was once part of Mariposa was ceded to twelve other counties: Fresno, Inyo, Kern, Kings, Los Angeles, Madera, Merced, Mono, San Benito, San Bernardino, San Luis Obispo, and Tulare.  Thus, Mariposa County is known as the Mother of Counties.()The county took its name from Creek, which was so named by Spanish explorers in 1806, when they discovered a great cluster of butterflies (mariposas in Spanish and Portuguese) in the foothills of the Sierras. Each year, the first weekend in May, residents mark the annual arrival of migrating butterflies with a Butterfly Days festival and parade.The Gold RushMariposa County is located at the southern end of Californias Lode region. During the Gold Rush, great quantities of the prized mineral were found and extracted, first in local stream-beds and later in hard rock mines. One of the most notable beneficiaries of this wealth was the famed explorer and 1856  Republican candidate, C. Frmont, for whom the local hospital is named. (Jessie Street, in the town of Mariposa, is named for Fremonts wife, Benton Frmont, who came to Mariposa to live with him.)Many aspects of the areas mining history are depicted in exhibits at two local museums: the Mariposa History Museum, located in the town of Mariposa; and the Mining and Mineral Museum, located at the Mariposa Fairgrounds (2 miles east of Mariposa on Highway 49).Geography and natural historyFile:WLA hmns Gold shaped dragon.jpg|thumb|The Dragon, crystalline gold from the Colorado Quartz Mine, Mariposa County. Collections of Museum of Natural Science.According to the 2000 census, the county has a total area of , of which  (or 99.20%) is land and  (or 0.80%) is water.() Along the banks of the River is found the sole habitat for the salamander, a species endemic to Mariposa County.National protected areas* National Forest (part)* National Forest (part)* National Park (part)CommunitiesCensus-designated places*Bear Valley*Bootjack*Buck Meadows*Catheys Valley*Coulterville*El Portal*Greeley Hill*Hornitos*Mariposa*Midpines*Wawona*Yosemite ValleyOther unincorporated places*Foresta*Jerseydale*Lush Meadows*Mt. Bullion*Oak Grove Estates*Ponderosa BasinAdjacent counties* County, California - north* County, California - west* County, California - south, east* County, California - northwest by a cornerTransportation infrastructureMajor highways*20px|link |alt State Route 41*20px|link |alt State Route 49*25px|link |alt State Route 120*25px|link |alt State Route 140Public transportation*County Transit provides dial-a-ride and some fixed route service*Area Regional Transit System (YARTS) provides service along State Routes 120 and 140 to National Park.AirportsYosemite Airport is a general aviation airport. The nearest airports with scheduled flights are in Fresno and Merced.Demographics2010The United States Census reported that Mariposa County had a population of 18,251. The racial makeup of Mariposa County was 16,103 (88.2%) White, 138 (0.8%) African American, 527 (2.9%) Native American, 204 (1.1%) Asian, 26 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 508 (2.8%) from other races, and 745 (4.1%) from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1,676 persons (9.2%).()2000As of the census of 2000, there were 17,130 people, 6,613 households, and 4,490 families residing in the county.  The density was 12 people per square mile (5/km).  There were 8,826 housing units at an average density of 6 per square mile (2/km).  The racial makeup of the county was 88.93% White, 0.67% Black or African American, 3.51% Native American, 0.71% Asian, 0.13% Pacific Islander, 2.67% from other races, and 3.38% from two or more races.  7.76% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 17.8% were of German, 13.4% English, 12.7% Irish and 6.7% American ancestry according to 2000. 96.0% spoke English and 3.5% Spanish as their first language.There were 6,613 households out of which 25.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.8% were married couples living together, 8.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.1% were non-families. 26.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.86.In the county the population was spread out with 21.6% under the age of 18, 6.9% from 18 to 24, 25.1% from 25 to 44, 29.2% from 45 to 64, and 17.2% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females there were 104.7 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 105.4 males.The median income for a household in the county was $34,626, and the median income for a family was $42,655. Males had a median income of $31,194 versus $25,440 for females. The capita income for the county was $18,190.  About 10.5% of families and 14.8% of the population were below the line, including 16.5% of those under age 18 and 9.0% of those age 65 or over. Politics Mariposa is a strongly Republican county in Presidential and congressional elections.  The last Democrat to win a majority in the county was Lyndon Johnson in 1964 but the last Democrat to win the county was Clinton in 1992 who won a plurality.Mariposa is part of 19th congressional district, which is held by Republican Denham. In the state legislature Mariposa is in the 25th Assembly district, which is held by Republican Olsen, and the 14th Senate district, which is held by Republican Berryhill.On Nov. 4, 2008 Mariposa County voted 62.3 % for Proposition 8 which amended the California Constitution to ban same-sex marriages.EnvironmentIn late July, 2008, authorities forced the evacuation of about 300 homes, in the wake of the wildfires in the area.See also* of school districts in Mariposa County, California*Register of Historic Places listings in Mariposa County, California* and Sierra Miwok people* people (Mariposan)References(External links*Mariposa County official website*Yosemite / Mariposa County Tourism Bureau*Daily News and Photos of Mariposa County* History and Genealogy of Mariposa County   ()CountyCountyde Mariposade Mariposa, di MariposaCounty, CaliforniaComitatusCountyCounty()CountyCountyMariposade MariposaCounty(, )Mariposa, California()
83157
cole_centrale_de_Lyon
The cole Centrale de Lyon, founded in 1857, is  one of the oldest universities in France. It is considered as one of the most prestigious (2011 LEtudiant/Express Rankings for top French Engineering Schools (Grandes Ecoles)) French coles of engineering continuously ranking as one of the Top 6 French Engineering research institutions for the post Bachelor study. The university is situated in cully, a western suburb of Lyon, France (in a region called Alpes).The University is one of the 6 members of the Centrale Graduate Schools (Lille, Paris, Marseille, Nantes, Pekin). The school is well-reputed for educating and training highly skilled engineers with a minimum degree of BSc through the many specialized postgraduate programs. Ecole Centrale de Lyon is a founding member of University of Lyon, Pole Research and Higher Education (PRES) established as a public establishment of scientific cooperation. The Schools excels in the research attached to Acoustics, Biosciences and Nanotechnology.Ecole Centrale de Lyon, or as sometimes referred to ECL, has strong ties with top institutions in Europe including College London and University of Technology. This in addition to having most of its post graduate programs shared between Lyon, Normale Suprieure de Lyon and Bernard University Lyon 1.History and LocationIt was founded in 1857 on a private initiative by Girardon, who was its first President. The founding vision was to educate multidisciplinary engineers for the emerging industry (doctors for fabs and plants). The institution was given to the French State Ministry of Education in 1947. Initially located downtown Lyon, it was transferred to cully, its current location.Growththumbnail|180px|right|1869: 2nd campus of Ecole Centrale de Lyon*1857: Birth of the Lyons Central School for Industry and Commerce, on the initiative of Desire GIRARDON, a professor at La Martiniere School, an institution for the teaching of Advanced Industrial Science and based primarily on the methods of La Martiniere school. The School is located at the corner of the Rue dEnghien (later Rue Vauban) and the course of Bourbon (later Castellane dock and pier-General Sarrail).*November 3, 1857 : Opening of the school with 14 students, who are promoting an issue, that of 1860.*1860 : The first class graduated, it will be followed by a promotion of 17 students.*1869 : Transfer of School Augagneur dock.*1887 : the school was officially placed under the patronage of the Chamber of Commerce of Lyon.At the heart of Lyon*1901 : Transfer street Chevreul on land donated by the city of Lyon in the person of its mayor, Edouard Herriot.*1930 : first woman in a promotion.*1947 : Assignment of the School to the state.*1949 : Creation of the association of students.*1963 : establishment of joint competition with the Ecole Centrale de Paris.Opening internationally since the campus cullythumbnail|right|400px|a portion of teaching buildings and library Michel Serres*1967: Transfer in Ecully, creation of a campus in the American.*1968: first agreement with the School of Darmstadt (Germany).*1970: new name: Central School of Lyon and first class of over 100 engineering students.*1980: first agreements with Japan and the USA.*1983 : first batch of over 200 engineering students.*1990: Creation of the Intergroup schools Central, the first agreement with China.*1992: School is a Public Establishment Scientific and Cultural Professional, the first agreement with the countries of Central and Eastern.*1996: creation of the European university network for dual degrees (TIME network).*2000: first agreements with countries in South America (Argentina, Chile, Brazil ...).*2001: first batch of over 300 students.*2002: opening an office in Shenzhen (China).*2003: opening of the Franco-Russian center for technology transfer.*2005: Creation of central Beijing.*2007: Intergroup is the group of Central Schools with Lille, Lyon, Marseille, Nantes and Paris.*2006-2007-2008: 150th anniversary of the Ecole Centrale de Lyon.*2009 : Yin Yang - Alliance project between Central and Lyon Business School EM LYON.*2011 : agreement of France AEROTECH(http://uranus.univ-toulouse.fr/fr/system/files/CPelargissementFRANCEAEROTECHdoc.pdf)AcademicsThe centralien program is the main academic program offered by the cole Centrale de Lyon, as a Graduate School. It is quite different from typical university or college studies; and specific to the French system of Grandes coles. The engineering degree of cole centrale de Lyon (Ingnieur centralien or centralien engineer) is a of Science degree.The defining characteristic of the curriculum is that it is multidisciplinary, with studies focusing on all math and physics derived engineering specialties: mechanics, physics, materials, fluid mechanics, electrical engineering,  applied mathematics, civil engineering, aeronautics, computer science, telecommunications and micro-nano-biotechnology.AdmissionThe large majority of the students are admitted after two to three years of prparatoires, known as mathematics superior and mathematics special, which are an undergraduate cursus with almost exclusive emphasis on Math and Physics. These undergraduate students must then take a nation-wide competitive entrance examination (Centrale-Suplec) to enter a Graduate School, including Ecole Centrale de Lyon. Ecole Centrale de Lyon recruits among the top 6% of the students in classes preparatoires, which makes it a selective and prestigious institution.A few seats are available each year to select students from French universities after completion of three or four years of post high-school education.A significant contingent of students also comes from leading international universities which belong to the TIME network (Industrial Managers for Europe).CurriculumEducation at the ECL is multidisciplinary and typically lasts three to four years. During the first two years (Tronc commun, or Common Trunk), students take mandatory classes in science (Mathematics, Physics); in engineering (Solids Mechanics, Heat transfer, Digital image processing, Computer programming,) and in social sciences (Economics, Management, foreign languages,). Students are then offered to sign up for different engineering specialties during their last year at the school. After completing these 3 years of education, they receive the degree of ingnieur de lcole centrale de Lyon, more commonly called ingnieur centralien.National and international tiesThe cole centrale de Lyon belongs to the French des coles centrales, together with centrale Paris, centrale de Lille, centrale de Nantes, centrale de Marseille and centrale de Pkin  .Since 1857, the school has built important international ties. Students come from around the world to study for several years on the school campus. cole centrale students may also obtain a double diploma at one of several partner schools. Furthermore, the cole is one of the founding members of the TIME network (Industrial Managers for Europe). (Member List)France**Graduate School***centrale Paris (FR-ECP) TIME-in - TIME-out***centrale de Lille (FR-ECLi) TIME-in - TIME-out***cole centrale de Lyon (FR-ECLy) TIME-in - TIME-out***centrale de Marseille (FR-ECM) TIME-in TIME-out***centrale de Nantes (FR-ECN) TIME in&out**Nationale des Ponts et Chausses (FR-ENPC)**Nationale Suprieure de Techniques Avances (FR-ENSTA)**Nationale Suprieure de lAronautique et de lEspace (FR-Supaero)**Suprieure dlectricit (FR-Supelec)Europe*Austria**Universitt Wien (AT-TUW) TIME-out - TIME-out - TIME-in*Belgium**polytechnique de Mons (BE-FPMS) TIME-out - TIME-in**Catholique de Louvain (BE-UCL) TIME out&in**Libre de Bruxelles (BE-ULB) TIME-out -TIME-in**de Lige (BE-ULG) TIME-out&in**Universiteit Brussel (BE-VUB) TIME out - TIME-in*Czech Republic**esk vysok uen technick v Praze (CZ-CVUT)*Denmark**Tekniske Universitet (DK-DTU) TIME in&out*Finland**Teknillinen Korkeakoulu (FI-TKK)*Germany**Rheinisch-Westflische Technische Hochschule Aachen (DE-RWTH)**Universitt Berlin (DE-TUB) Internationale Beziehungen TIME in&out**Universitt Darmstadt (DE-TUDa) TIME in&out**Universitt Dresden (DE-TUDr) TIME in&out**Universitt Mnchen (DE-TUM) TIME in&out**Universitt Erlangen-Nrnberg (DE-UEN)**Stuttgart (DE-UST)*Greece**University of Thessaloniki (GR-AUTH)**Ethniko Metsovio Polytechnio Athina (GR-NTUA)*Hungary**University of Technology and Economics (HU-BUTE)*Italy**di Milano (IT-PoliMi) TIME-in&out**di Torino (IT-PoliTo)**degli Studi di Padova (IT-UniPd) TIME in&out**Universit degli Studi di Trento (IT-UniTn) TIME in&out*Norway**University of Science and Technology (NO-NTNU)  TIME in&out*Poland**University of Technology (PL-WUT)*Portugal**Superior Tcnico (PT-IST)*Russian Federation**Moscow State Technical University (RU-BMSTU) TIME in&out**Moscow State Technical University of Radio Engineering (RU-MIREA) TIME in&out**Polytechnic University (RU-TPU)*Spain**Politcnica de Madrid (ES-UPM) TIME in&out**Universidad Politcnica de Valencia (ES-UPV) TIME in&out**Universidad Pontificia Comillas (ES-UPCo)**de Sevilla (ES-USE)**Universitat Politcnica de Catalunya (ES-UPC)*Sweden**Chalmers Tekniska Hgskola (SE-CTH)**Kungl. Tekniska Hgskolan (SE-KTH) TIME in&out**Lunds Tekniska Hgskola (SE-LTH) TIME in&out*Switzerland**Technische Hochschule Zrich (CH-ETHZ)**Polytechnique Fdrale de Lausanne (CH-EPFL)*United Kingdom**University of Belfast (GB-QUB)**College London (GB-ICL)America, Asia and AfricaResearchThe cole centrale de Lyon is highly involved in research, and has the highest rate of PhD lecturers amidst the French Grandes coles.ECL hosts 7 Research Centers related to the of Lyon:* Ampre : Electrical Engineering, Electromagnetism, Control engineering, Microbiology http://www.ampere-lyon.fr/* ICJ : Applied Mathematics http://math.univ-lyon1.fr/* ICTT : Teleformation, Teleinteractivity http://www.insa-lyon.fr/ictt* INL : Lyon Institute of Nanotechnology http://inl.cnrs.fr/* LMFA : Fluid Mechanics and Acoustics http://www.lmfa.ec-lyon.fr/* LTDS : Tribology and Systems dynamics http://ltds.ec-lyon.fr/* LIRIS : Computer Science, Signal and Image Processing http://liris.cnrs.fr/AmpreThe overall objective of the research to Ampere is the management and rational use of energy in the systems in relation to their environment.Ampre was born in 2007:*fusion of CEGELY (Center of Electrical Engineering of Lyon) and LAI (Laboratory ofAutomation Industrielle de Lyon), and*integration of researchers in Environmental Microbiology ...Contractualised with CNRS and three establishments in Lyon (ECL, INSA, UCBL), Ampere has over 160 employeesTags :*Materials of Electrical Engineering, Power Electronics, High-Voltage, EMC, Electromagnetic modeling*Control-command, Mechatronics, Fluid Power, Robotics Medical Diagnosis and dependability*Gene transfer and bacterial adaptation, ecological engineeringThe Laboratory is organized into three scientific departments :*Electric power : to create and optimize the devices for transportation, distribution and conversion of Electrical energy, taking into account their environments*Bioengineering : the emergence of fundamental concepts, methods and applications in bioengineering by a synergy between electrical engineering, Science of Microsystems and Biology.*Methods for Systems Engineering : develop new methods of analysis and synthesis design constraints controlled integrating control, reliability and monitoring of multi-physical relationship with their environmentICJCamille Jordan Institute for Mathematical sciencesICTTICTT Laboratory undertakes research in the field of Information and Communication Technologies and their use.INLThe Institute of Nanotechnologies of Lyon was created on January the 1rst, 2007, through the merger of three laboratories : the Laboratory of Electronics, Optoelectronics and Microsystems (Laboratoire dElectronique Optolectronique et Microsystmes - LEOM) of Ecole centrale de Lyon, the Laboratory of Material Physics (Laboratoire de Physique de la Matire - LPM) of INSA de Lyon and the Laboratory of Electronics Nanotechnologies and Sensors (Laboratoire dElectronique Nanotechnologies et Capteurs - LENAC) of Universit Lyon 1.The Lyon Institute of Nanotechnology (INL) is a fundamental and applied research laboratory in the field of micro- and nano-technology. Its mission is to conduct research towards the development of fully-fledged technologies for a broad range of application sectors (semiconductors and micro-electronics, telecoms, energy, health, biology, industrial control, defence, environment).Research is organised around four main topics (organized in departments):Functional Materials, Electronics, Photonics & Photovoltaics and Biotechnology and healthThe research programs draw on the resources of the Lyon-based Nanolyon technology platform.A transversal research operation is specifically dedicated to the development of Nanocharacterization tools and techniques.The laboratory is situated on the campuses of Ecole Centrale de Lyon, INSA Lyon, University of Lyon 1 and CPE. It comprises 120 permanent staff and approximately 95 non-permanent staff. The annual budget excluding salaries is about 3MLMFAThee LMFA is a joint research unit attached to the CNRS, Ecole Centrale de Lyon, Universit Claude Bernard Lyon 1 and INSA Lyon. He is a member of the Institut Carnot Engineering @ Lyon.The activity of the Laboratory is organized around four research groups: Centre for Acoustics, Fluid complex and Transfers Turbomachinery, Turbulence and Stability.The research focuses on the physics and modeling of turbulence, hydrodynamic instabilities, two-phase flows, environmental fluid mechanics, aerodynamics internal thermal phenomena coupled aeroacoustics, acoustic propagation, methods of solving Navier-Stokes equations, the active or passive control of flow, microfluidics.This research lead to numerous collaborations with industry players and institutional areas of Transport, Environment and Energy. The goal is to provide developers with the tools of analysis and modeling to optimize their products or processes and reduce the energy and environmental impact.In the transport sector, the LMFA developed an expertise on turbine (axial compressors of aircraft engines, turbo and centrifugal machines) on the reduction of noise (cars, planes, TGV) and the new engine cars. Research in the Environment focuses on mass transfer in the atmosphere, environmental hydraulics, noise and noise pollution, industrial hazards. The study covered the energy sector, particularly in terms of process optimization fluids, nuclear or oil phase flow, hydraulic turbines, new energy sourcesLTDSThe laboratory of Tribology and Systems Dynamics, was created in 1992 and became in January 1995 a Mixed Unit of Research CNRS-MESR (ECL-ENISE) (UMR 5513) which depends on the Scientific department Engineering and Information Sciences and Technologies, depending on Section 9 of the Evaluation National Committee. LTDS is on two sites: Centrale Lyon (main site) and the National School of Engineers at Saint-Etienne.Its scientific field is broad and covers Tribology (study of friction, wear, lubrication, adherence), Systems Dynamics (control of vibrations and stability of systems and machine parts) Solids Mechanics (structures calculation) and transformation processes (cut, assembly).The L.T.D.S existence is due to the succession of the following events:1970: Creation of Surfaces Technology Department at Centrale Lyon by J.M. Georges1974: Association to CNRS : Surfaces Technology Laboratory, URA 855.1991: Proposal of widening to Solids Mechanics Department from Centrale Lyon and to Interfaces Physics Department from ENISE.1993: Creation of Laboratory of Tribology and Systems Dynamics, Director J.M. GEORGES. Change of direction: P. Kapsa Director.LIRISLIRIS (Laboratoire dInfoRmatique en Image et Systmes dinformation) was created in 2003 through the merging of several former laboratories involved in Communication and Information Technology research. LIRIS is affiliated to CNRS (Centre National de Recherche Scientifique) under the label UMR 5205.The laboratory involves 280 people with 94 faculty members and researchers from INSA de Lyon, Universit Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Ecole Centrale de Lyon, Universit Lumire Lyon 2 and CNRS.The laboratory is organized in two departments :*Image department : It has approximately 40 faculty members (12 professors, 28 associate professors) and 3 permanent researchers. The department incorporates five research teams. The research activities of the department cover a wide variety of methods for sensors (2D, 2D+t, 3D) data analysis, for a better understanding and for multidimensional data modeling. Hence, the research activities cover the areas of image analysis, modeling, simulation and rendering. Various data representation models are investigated, including regular grids of sensors, graphs, mesh, geometric models, procedural models, statistical or physical models. The hybridization of these models can yield to the enrichment of the representation space. The developed techniques rest on competencies of the research teams around image and signal processing, geometric modeling, algorithmic geometry, discrete geometry, topology, graphs, realistic rendering and augmented reality.*Data, Knowledge and Services (DCS) department : The DCS department is organized around five research teams involving 44 faculty members (11 professors, 33 associate professors). The research activities of the department cover a wide variety of theories, methods, and applications of information technology to the management of data, knowledge and services. It covers the following areas:Knowledge discovery (data mining, complex systems modeling, knowledge engineering)Data and services engineering (security and confidentiality, modeling, integration and querying, service composition)The laboratory leads research on fundamental issues in these areas (image, and Data, Knowledge and services). It also investigates applications with an impact on society :Culture and heritage (digital libraries, critical edition, digitization of ancient documents, archiving, 3D virtual museums )Ambient intelligence (pervasive systems, sensor networks, intelligent video surveillance, secured communicating objects )Biology and health (data mining, complex systems modeling and analysis, e-health, )Human learning (personalization, cognitive assistance, collaborative learning )Digital entertainment (video games, animated cinema, multimedia data processing ) Notable alumni* Victor (1928), explorator,* Riboud (1947), Photograph* Kruchten (1975), software engineer, professor of software engineering,The Graduate SchoolIn addition to the centralien engineering programme, the cole centrale de Lyon offers a broad range of masters programs in science and engineering (1 year- or 2 year-programmes). These programmes are opened to applicants having completed their undergraduate studies at other institutions.The ECL also has a Ph.D. program for students with a masters level. More than 100 doctoral candidates work in 5 different laboratories in the school.See alsodes coles centralesReferencesExternal links* Official website* cole centrale de Lyon library website* cole centrale de Lyon on Facebook* cole centrale de Lyon on Twitter* Histoire de lEcole Centrale de Lyon websiteCentrale de Lyoncentrale de LyonCentrale de Lyoncentrale de LyonCentrale de Lyoncentrale de LyonCentrale de Lyonzh:
85023
Appalachian_Mountains
map_size275The Appalachian Mountains ( or (There are at least eight possible pronunciations depending on three factors:#Whether the stressed vowel is  or ,#Whether the ch is pronounced as a fricative  or an affricate , and#Whether the final vowel is the monophthong  or the diphthong .)), often called the Appalachians, are a vast system of mountains in eastern America.  The Appalachians are believed to have been the highest mountains on earth roughly 460 million years ago during the Ordovician Period, much like (but higher than) the Himalayas today, when all of todays continents were joined as the supercontinent Pangaea.()  The Appalachian chain is a barrier to east-west travel as it forms a series of alternating ridgelines and valleys oriented in opposition to any road running east-west.Definitions vary on the precise boundaries of the Appalachians. The States Geological Survey (USGS) defines the Appalachian Highlands physiographic division as consisting of thirteen provinces: the Coast Uplands, Newfoundland Atlantic, Acadian Highlands, Plain, Dame and Mgantic Mountains, Newfoundland Mountains, Piedmont, Blue Ridge, Valley and Ridge, Saint Lawrence Valley, Plateaus, England province, and the Adirondack provinces.()() A common variant definition does not include the Mountains, which are often said to have more in common with the Shield than the Appalachians.()()()OverviewThe range is mostly located in the States but extends into southeastern Canada,  forming a zone from 100 to 300 miles (160 to 480 km) wide, running from the island of Newfoundland 1,500 miles (2,400 km) south-westward to Alabama in the United States. The system is divided into a series of ranges, with the individual mountains averaging around 3,000 ft (900 m). The highest of the group is Mount Mitchell in Carolina at , which is the highest point in the United States east of the River.The term Appalachian refers to several different regions associated with the mountain range. Most broadly, it refers to the entire mountain range with its surrounding hills and the dissected plateau region. However, the term is often used more restrictively to refer to regions in the central and southern Appalachian Mountains, usually including areas in the states of Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, Maryland, Virginia, and Carolina, as well as sometimes extending as far south as northern Georgia and western Carolina, as far north as Pennsylvania and southern Ohio.The Mountains in Arkansas and Oklahoma were originally part of the Appalachians as well, but were disconnected through geologic history.While exploring inland along the northern coast of Florida in 1528, the members of the expedition, including Nez Cabeza de Vaca, found a Native American village near present-day Florida whose name they transcribed as Apalchen or Apalachen . The name was soon altered by the Spanish to Apalachee and used as a name for the tribe and region spreading well inland to the north.  de Narvezs expedition first entered Apalachee territory on June 15, 1528 and applied the name.  Now spelled Appalachian, it is the fourth oldest surviving European place-name in the U.S.(After Florida, Canaveral, and Tortugas:  )After the de Soto expedition in 1540, Spanish cartographers began to apply the name of the tribe to the mountains themselves. The first cartographic appearance of Apalchen is on Diego Gutierrez map of 1562; the first use for the mountain range is the map of le Moyne de Morgues in 1565.(Walls, David (1977), On the Naming of Appalachia In An Appalachian Symposium, pp. 56-76.)The name was not commonly used for the whole mountain range until the late 19th century. A competing and often more popular name was the Mountains, Alleghenies, and even Alleghania. In the early 19th century, Irving proposed renaming the United States either Appalachia or Alleghania.(Stewart, George R. (1967). Names on the Land. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.)In U.S. dialects of the southern portions of the Appalachians, the word is pronounced , with the third syllable sounding like latch.  In northern parts of the mountain range, it is pronounced  or ; the third syllable is like lay, and the fourth chins or shins.(David Walls, Appalachia. The Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville, Tenn.: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), 1006-1007.) Elsewhere, a commonly accepted pronunciation for the adjective Appalachian is , with the last two syllables -ian pronounced as in the word Italian.(Define Appalachian. Random House Dictionary, online at Dictionary.com. Retrieved 15 May 2011.)GeographyRegionsmap.jpg|thumb|275px|USGS Appalachian zones in the United States.Image:WV plateau.jpg|right|thumb|Shaded relief map of the Plateau and Appalachians on the Virginia-Virginia border.The whole system may be divided into three great sections: the Northern, from the province of and Labrador to the River; the Central, from the Hudson Valley to the New River (Great Kanawha) running through Virginia and West Virginia; and the Southern, from the New River onwards.The northern section includes the Range Mountains and Mountains on the island of Newfoundland, Mountains and Notre Dame Range in Quebec and New Brunswick, scattered elevations and small ranges elsewhere in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, the Mountains in Maine, the White Mountains in New Hampshire, the Mountains in Vermont, and Berkshires in Massachusetts and Connecticut.  The Metacomet Ridge Mountains in Connecticut and south-central Massachusetts, although contained within the Appalachian province, is a younger system and not geologically associated with the Appalachians. The central section comprises, excluding various minor groups, the Valley Ridges between the Front of the Plateau and the Appalachian Valley, the York - New Jersey Highlands, the Mountains in New York, and a large portion of the Blue Ridge.  The southern section consists of the prolongation of the Blue Ridge, which is divided into the Western Blue Ridge (or Unaka) Front and the Eastern Blue Ridge Front, the Appalachians, and the Plateau.The Mountains in New York are sometimes considered part of the Appalachian chain but, geologically speaking, are a southern extension of the Mountains of Canada.(((In addition to the true folded mountains, known as the ridge and valley province, the area of plateau to the north and west of the mountains is usually grouped with the Appalachians. This includes the Mountains of southeastern York, the Poconos in Pennsylvania, and the Plateau of southwestern New York, western Pennsylvania, eastern Ohio and northern Virginia. This same plateau is known as the Plateau in southern Virginia, eastern Kentucky, western Virginia, eastern Tennessee, and northern Alabama.The dissected plateau area, while not actually made up of geological mountains, is popularly called mountains, especially in eastern Kentucky and West Virginia, and while the ridges are not high, the terrain is extremely rugged. In Ohio and New York, some of the plateau has been glaciated, which has rounded off the sharp ridges, and filled the valleys to some extent. The glaciated regions are usually referred to as hill country rather than mountains.The Appalachian region is generally considered the geographical dividing line between the eastern seaboard of the United States and the Midwest region of the country.  The Continental Divide follows the Appalachian Mountains from Pennsylvania to Georgia.The Trail is a  hiking trail that runs all the way from Katahdin in Maine to Mountain in Georgia, passing over or past a large part of the Appalachian system. The Appalachian Trail is an extension of this hiking trail into the Canadian portion of the Appalachian range.Chief summitsThe Appalachian belt includes, with the ranges enumerated above, the plateaus sloping southward to the Atlantic Ocean in England, and south-eastward to the border of the plain through the central and southern Atlantic states; and on the north-west, the Allegheny and Cumberland plateaus declining toward the Great Lakes and the interior plains. A remarkable feature of the belt is the longitudinal chain of broad valleys, including The Appalachian Valley, which in the southerly sections divides the mountain system into two unequal portions, but in the northernmost lies west of all the ranges possessing typical Appalachian features, and separates them from the Adirondack group. The mountain system has no axis of dominating altitudes, but in every portion the summits rise to rather uniform heights, and, especially in the central section, the various ridges and intermontane valleys have the same trend as the system itself. None of the summits reaches the region of perpetual snow.Image:Appalachian fault.jpg|thumb|left|Old fault exposed by roadcut near Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, along 81. Such faults are common in the folded Appalachians.Mountains of the Long Range in Newfoundland reach heights of nearly . In the Chic-Choc and Notre Dame mountain ranges in Quebec, the higher summits rise to about  elevation. Isolated peaks and small ranges in Scotia and Brunswick vary from .  In Maine several peaks exceed ., including Katahdin . In Hampshire, many summits rise above , including Mount Washington in the White Mountains ,  Adams , Jefferson , Monroe ), Madison , Lafayette , and Lincoln . In the Mountains the highest point, Mt. Mansfield, is  in elevation; others include Peak at ., Camels Hump at ., Mt. Abraham at ., and a number of other heights exceeding .In Pennsylvania, there are over sixty summits that rise over ; the summits of Mount Davis and Knob rise over . In Maryland, Eagle Rock and Mountain are conspicuous points reaching  and  respectively. On the same side of the Great Valley, south of the Potomac, are the Pinnacle  and Pidgeon Roost . In Virginia, more than 150 peaks rise above ., including Knob , the highest point in the Mountains. A number of other points in the state rise above . Mountain at Thorny Flat  and Knob  are among the more notable peaks in West Virginia.Image:Cliffs above Gauley-27527.jpg|thumb|right|Cliffs overlooking the New River near Gauley Bridge, Virginia.The Ridge Mountains, rising in southern Pennsylvania and there known as South Mountain, attain elevations of about  in that state.  South Mountain achieves its highest point just below the Mason-Dixon line in Maryland at Mountain  and then diminishes in height southward to the River. Once in Virginia the Blue Ridge again reaches  and higher. In the Virginia Blue Ridge, the following are some of the highest peaks north of the River: Stony Man , Mountain , Orchard Mountain  and of Otter .  South of the Roanoke River, along the Blue Ridge, are Virginias highest peaks including Mountain  and Rogers , the highest point in the Commonwealth.Chief summits in the southern section of the Blue Ridge are located along two main crests the Western or Unaka Front along the Tennessee-North Carolina border and the Eastern Front in North Carolina or one of several cross ridges between the two main crests.  Major subranges of the Eastern Front include the Black Mountains, Craggy Mountains, and Balsam Mountains, and its chief summits include Mountain  near the Virginia-North Carolina border, Mitchell  in the Blacks, and Balsam Knob  and Cold Mountain  in the Great Balsams.  The Western Blue Ridge Front is subdivided into the Range, the Mountains, the Smoky Mountains, and the Mountains, and its major peaks include Roan Mountain  in the Unakas, Big Bald  and Patch  in the Bald Mountains, Dome , Mount Le Conte , and Mount Guyot  in the Great Smokies, and Frog Mountain  near the Tennessee-Georgia-North Carolina border. Prominent summits in the cross ridges include Knob () in the Balsams.  Across northern Georgia, numerous peaks exceed , including Bald, the states highest, at  and  Bald.DrainageThe Appalachian Mountains are such an ancient mountain range that it has at least one river that flows across it: something that is impossible with newer and higher mountain ranges such as the Mountains or the Andes. The New River rises in the middle of the Appalachians in northwestern Carolina. This river must have been even older than the mountain range, and as the Appalachians and the Ridge Mountains rose, the New River kept pace with the growth of the mountains, cutting its gorge ever deeper, and continuing to flow north. After flowing into West Virginia, the New River continues in the River Gorge until it flows into the River, which is a mere change-of-name for the river. This river flows into the River, which then flows west.There are many other geological issues concerning the rivers and streams of the Appalachians. In spite of the existence of the Great Appalachian Valley, many of the main rivers are transverse to the axis of this mountain system. The divide of the Appalachians follows a tortuous course which crosses the mountainous belt just north of the New River in Virginia. South of the New River the rivers head into the Blue Ridge, cross the higher Unakas, receive important tributaries from the Great Valley, and traversing the Cumberland Plateau in spreading gorges, escape by way of the River and the River rivers to the River and the River, and thence to the of Mexico. In the central section, north of the New River, the rivers, rising in or just beyond the Valley Ridges, flow through great gorges (gaps) to the Great Valley, and then across the Blue Ridge to tidal estuaries penetrating the coastal plain via the Roanoke River, James River, River, and River.In the northern section the height of land lies on the inland side of the mountainous belt, and thus the main lines of drainage runs from north to south, exemplified by the River. However, the valley through which the Hudson River flows was cut by the gigantic glaciers of the Ages - the same glaciers that deposited their moraines in southern York State and formed the east-west Island.GeologyImage:Eastern North American Paleogeograpy Middle Devonian.png|thumb|right|Paleogeographic reconstruction showing the Appalachian Basin area during the Devonian period.()A look at rocks exposed in todays Appalachian mountains reveals elongated belts of folded and thrust faulted marine rocks, rocks and slivers of ancient ocean floor, which provides strong evidence that these rocks were deformed during plate collision. The birth of the Appalachian ranges, some 480 million years ago, marks the first of several mountain building plate collisions that culminated in the construction of the supercontinent Pangaea with the Appalachians near the center.  Because North America and Africa were connected, the Appalachians formed part of the same mountain chain as the Atlas in Morocco. This mountain range, known as the Pangean Mountains, extended into Scotland, from the North America/Europe collision - see orogeny.During the middle Period (about 496-440 million years ago), a change in plate motions set the stage for the first Paleozoic mountain building event (orogeny) in America. The once-quiet Appalachian passive margin changed to a very active plate boundary when a neighboring oceanic plate, the Iapetus, collided with and began sinking beneath the American craton. With the birth of this new subduction zone, the early Appalachians were born. Along the continental margin, volcanoes grew, coincident with the initiation of subduction. Thrust faulting uplifted and warped older sedimentary rock laid down on the passive margin. As mountains rose, erosion began to wear them down. Streams carried rock debris down slope to be deposited in nearby lowlands. The Taconic Orogeny was just the first of a series of mountain building plate collisions that contributed to the formation of the Appalachians, culminating in the collision of North America and Africa (see orogeny).(By the end of the Mesozoic era, the Appalachian Mountains had been eroded to an almost flat plain.( It was not until the region was uplifted during the Era that the distinctive topography of the present formed.() Uplift rejuvenated the streams, which rapidly responded by cutting downward into the ancient bedrock. Some streams flowed along weak layers that define the folds and faults created many millions of years earlier. Other streams downcut so rapidly that they cut right across the resistant folded rocks of the mountain core, carving canyons across rock layers and geologic structures.Mineral resourcesThe Appalachian Mountains contain major deposits of anthracite coal as well as coal. In the folded mountains the coal is in metamorphosed form as anthracite, represented by the Region of Pennsylvania. The bituminous coal fields of Pennsylvania, Maryland, southeastern Ohio, eastern Kentucky, southwestern Virginia, and West Virginia contain the sedimentary form of coal.()  The top removal method of mining, in which entire mountain tops are removed, is currently threatening vast areas and ecosystems of the Appalachian Mountain region.()The discovery in 1859 of commercial quantities of petroleum in the Appalachian mountains of western Pennsylvania started the modern United States industry.()  Recent discoveries of commercial gas deposits in the Shale formation have once again focused oil industry attention on the Appalachian Basin.Some plateaus of the Appalachian Mountains contain metallic minerals such as iron and zinc.()EcologyFloraImage:Mount Mitchell-27527.jpg|thumb|right|View from Mount Mitchell.  At , Mitchell in Carolina is the highest peak east of the River.The floras of the Appalachians are diverse and vary primarily in response to geology, latitude, elevation and moisture availability. Geobotanically, they constitute a province of the American Atlantic Region. The Appalachians consist primarily of deciduous broad-leaf trees and evergreen needle-leaf conifers, but also contain the evergreen broad-leaf Holly (), and the deciduous needle-leaf conifer, the Tamarack, or Eastern Larch ().The dominant northern and high elevation conifer is the Spruce (), which grows from near sea level to above  above sea level (asl) in northern England and southeastern Canada. It also grows southward along the Appalachian crest to the highest elevations of the southern Appalachians, as in Carolina and Tennessee. In the central Appalachians it is usually confined above  asl, except for a few cold valleys in which it reaches lower elevations. In the southern Appalachians it is restricted to higher elevations. Another species is the Spruce (), which extends farthest north of any conifer in North America, is found at high elevations in the northern Appalachians, and in bogs as far south as Pennsylvania.The Appalachians are also home to two species of fir, the boreal Fir (), and the southern high elevation endemic, Fir ().  Fraser Fir is confined to the highest parts of the southern Appalachian Mountains, where along with Red Spruce it forms a fragile ecosystem known as the Appalachian spruce-fir forest.  Fraser Fir rarely occurs below , and becomes the dominant tree type at .(Rose Houk, Great Smoky Mountains National Park: A Natural History Guide (Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1993), pp. 50-62.)  By contrast, Balsam Fir is found from near sea level to the tree line in the northern Appalachians, but ranges only as far south as Virginia and West Virginia in the central Appalachians, where it is usually confined above  asl, except in cold valleys. Curiously, it is associated with oaks in Virginia. The Balsam Fir of Virginia and West Virginia is thought by some to be a natural hybrid between the more northern variety and Fraser Fir. While Red Spruce is common in both upland and bog habitats, Balsam Fir, as well as Black Spruce and Tamarack, are more characteristic of the latter. However Balsam Fir also does well in soils with a pH as high as 6.(Fowells, H.A., 1965, Silvics of Forest Trees of the United States, Agricultural Handbook No. 271, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington D.C.)Eastern or Canada Hemlock () is another important evergreen needle-leaf conifer that grows along the Appalachian chain from north to south, but is confined to lower elevations than Red Spruce and the firs. It generally occupies richer and less acidic soils than the spruce and firs and is characteristic of deep, shaded and moist mountain valleys and coves. It is, unfortunately, subject to the Woolly Adelgid (), an introduced insect, that is rapidly extirpating it as a forest tree. Less abundant, and restricted to the southern Appalachians, is Hemlock (). Like Canada Hemlock, this tree suffers severely from the Hemlock Woolly Adelgid.Several species of pines characteristic of the Appalachians are White Pine (), Pine (), Pine (), Mountain Pine () and Pine (). Pine () is a boreal species that forms a few high elevation outliers as far south as West Virginia. All of these species except White Pine tend to occupy sandy, rocky, poor soil sites, which are mostly acidic in character. White Pine, a large species valued for its timber, tends to do best in rich, moist soil, either acidic or alkaline in character. Pitch Pine is also at home in acidic, boggy soil, and Table Mountain Pine may occasionally be found in this habitat as well. Shortleaf Pine is generally found in warmer habitats and at lower elevations than the other species. All the species listed do best in open or lightly shaded habitats, although White Pine also thrives in shady coves, valleys, and on floodplains.Image:Craggy Gardens-27527.jpg|thumb|left|The view from Craggy Gardens on the Ridge Parkway.The Appalachians are characterized by a wealth of large, beautiful deciduous broadleaf (hardwood) trees. Their occurrences are best summarized and described in E. Lucy Brauns 1950 classic, Deciduous Forests of Eastern North America (Macmillan, New York). The most diverse and richest forests are the Mixed Mesophytic or medium moisture types, which are largely confined to rich, moist montane soils of the southern and central Appalachians, particularly in the Cumberland and Allegheny Mountains, but also thrive in the southern Appalachian coves. Characteristic canopy species are White Basswood (), Buckeye (), Maple (), Beech (), Tuliptree (), Ash () and Birch (). Other common trees are Maple (), Shagbark and Bitternut Hickories () and Black or Sweet Birch (). Small understory trees and shrubs include Dogwood (), Hophornbeam (), Witch-hazel () and Spicebush (). There are also hundreds of perennial and annual herbs, among them such herbal and medicinal plants as American Ginseng (), Goldenseal (), Bloodroot () and Cohosh ().The foregoing trees, shrubs and herbs are also more widely distributed in less rich mesic forests that generally occupy coves, stream valleys and plains throughout the southern and central Appalachians at low and intermediate elevations. In the northern Appalachians and at higher elevations of the central and southern Appalachians these diverse mesic forests give way to less diverse Northern Hardwoods with canopies dominated only by American Beech, Sugar Maple, Basswood () and Yellow Birch and with far fewer species of shrubs and herbs.Dryer and rockier uplands and ridges are occupied by Oak-Chestnut type forests dominated by a variety of oaks ( spp.), hickories ( spp.) and, in the past, by the Chestnut (). The American Chestnut was virtually eliminated as a canopy species by the introduced fungal Chestnut Blight (), but lives on as sapling-sized sprouts that originate from roots, which are not killed by the fungus. In present day forest canopies Chestnut has been largely replaced by oaks.The oak forests of the southern and central Appalachians consist largely of Black, Northern Red, White, Chestnut and Oaks ( and ) and hickories, such as the Pignut () in particular. The richest forests, which grade into mesic types, usually in coves and on gentle slopes, have dominantly White and Northern Red Oaks, while the driest sites are dominated by Chestnut Oak, or sometimes by Scarlet or Northern Red Oaks. In the northern Appalachians the oaks, except for White and Northern Red, drop out, while the latter extends farthest north.Image:Rhododendron maximum-27527.jpg|thumb|right|Great Laurel thicket in the National Forest.The oak forests generally lack the diverse small tree, shrub and herb layers of mesic forests. Shrubs are generally ericaceous, and include the evergreen Laurel (), various species of blueberries ( spp.), Huckleberry (), a number of deciduous rhododendrons (azaleas), and smaller heaths such as Teaberry () and Arbutus (). The evergreen Great Rhododendron () is characteristic of moist stream valleys. These occurrences are in line with the prevailing acidic character of most oak forest soils. In contrast, the much rarer Chinquapin Oak () demands alkaline soils and generally grows where limestone rock is near the surface. Hence no ericaceous shrubs are associated with it.The Appalachian floras also include a diverse assemblage of bryophytes (mosses and liverworts), as well as fungi. Some species are rare and/or endemic. As with plants, these tend to be closely related to the character of the soils and thermal environment in which they are found.Eastern deciduous forests are subject to a number of serious insect and disease outbreaks. Among the most conspicuous is that of the introduced Gypsy Moth  (), which infests primarily oaks, causing severe defoliation and tree mortality. But it also has the benefit of eliminating weak individuals, and thus improving the genetic stock, as well as creating rich habitat of a type through accumulation of dead wood. Because hardwoods sprout so readily, this moth is not as harmful as the Woolly Adelgid. Perhaps more serious is the introduced Beech Bark Disease Complex, which includes both a scale insect () and fungal components.During the 19th and early 20th centuries the Appalachian forests were subject to severe and destructive logging and land clearing, which resulted in the designation of the National Forests and Parks as well many state protected areas. However, these and a variety of other destructive activities continue, albeit in diminished forms; and thus far only a few ecologically based management practices have taken hold.FaunaAnimals that characterize the Appalachian forests include five species of squirrels. The most commonly seen is the low to moderate elevation Gray Squirrel (). Occupying similar habitat is the slightly larger Squirrel () and the much smaller Flying Squirrel (). More characteristic of cooler northern and high elevation habitat is the Red Squirrel (), whereas the Appalachian Flying Squirrel (), which closely resembles the Southern Flying Squirrel, is confined to northern hardwood and spruce-fir forests.Image:Southern Flying Squirrel-27527-3.jpg|thumb|left|flying squirrel.As familiar as squirrels are the Cottontail rabbit () and the Deer (). The latter in particular has greatly increased in abundance as a result of the extirpation of the Wolf () and the American Cougar. This has led to the overgrazing and browsing of many plants of the Appalachian forests, as well as destruction of agricultural crops. Other deer include the Moose (), found only in the north, and the Elk (), which, although once extirpated, is now making a comeback, through transplantation, in the southern and central Appalachians. In Quebec, the Chic-Chocs host the only population of Caribou () south of the Lawrence River. An additional species that is common in the north but extends its range southward at high elevations to Virginia and West Virginia is the Varying or Hare ().  However, these central Appalachian populations are scattered and very small.Another species of great interest is the Beaver (), which is showing a great resurgence in numbers after its near extirpation for its pelt. This resurgence is bringing about a drastic alteration in habitat through the construction of dams and other structures throughout the mountains.Other common forest animals are the Black Bear (), Skunk (), Raccoon (), Woodchuck (), Bobcat (), Fox (), Fox () and in recent years, the Coyote (), another species favored by the advent of Europeans and the extirpation of Eastern and Red Wolves. European boars were introduced in the early 20th century.Characteristic birds of the forest are Turkey (), Grouse (), Dove (), Raven (), Duck (), Horned Owl (), Owl (), Screech Owl (), Hawk (), Hawk (), and Goshawk (), as well as a great variety of songbirds (Passeriformes), like the warblers in particular.Turkey-27527-1.jpg|thumb|right|Male Eastern Wild Turkey.Of great importance are the many species of salamanders, and in particular the lungless species (Family ) that live in great abundance concealed by leaves and debris, on the forest floor. Most frequently seen, however, is the Eastern or Red-spotted Newt (), whose terrestrial eft form is often encountered on the open, dry forest floor.  It has been estimated that salamanders represent the largest class of animal biomass in the Appalachian forests. Frogs and toads are of lesser diversity and abundance, but the Frog () is, like the eft, commonly encountered on the dry forest floor, while a number of species of small frogs, such as Peepers (), enliven the forest with their calls. Salamanders and other amphibians contribute greatly to nutrient cycling through their consumption of small life forms on the forest floor and in aquatic habitats.Although reptiles are less abundant and diverse than amphibians, a number of snakes are conspicuous members of the fauna. One of the largest is the non-poisonous Rat Snake (), while the Garter Snake () is among the smallest but most abundant. The Copperhead () and the Rattler () are poisonous vipers. There are few lizards, but the Skink (), at up to 13 inches (33 cm) in length, and an excellent climber and swimmer, is one of the largest and most spectacular in appearance and action. The most common turtle is the Box Turtle (), which is found in both upland and lowland forests in the central and southern Appalachians. Prominent among aquatic species is the large Snapping Turtle (), which occurs throughout the Appalachians.Appalachian streams are notable for their highly diverse freshwater fish life. Among the most abundant and diverse are those of the minnow family (Family Cyprinidae), while species of the colorful Darters ( spp.) are also abundant.(Page, Lawrence M. and Brooks M. Burr 1991, A Field Guide to Freshwater Fishes, North America, North of Mexico, Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston)A characteristic fish of shaded, cool Appalachian forest streams is the Wild Brook or Speckled Trout (), which is much sought after for its sporting qualities. However in past years such trout waters have been much degraded by increasing temperatures because of timber cutting, warming and by pollution from various sources.Influence on historyFor a century, the Appalachians were a barrier to the westward expansion of the British colonies. The continuity of the mountain system, the bewildering multiplicity of its succeeding ridges, the tortuous courses and roughness of its transverse passes, a heavy forest, and dense undergrowth all conspired to hold the settlers on the seaward-sloping plateaus and coastal plains. Only by way of the Hudson and Valleys, and round about the southern termination of the system were there easy routes to the interior of the country, and these were long closed by powerful Native American tribes such as the Iroquois, Creek, and Cherokee, among others. Expansion was also blocked by the alliances the Empire had forged with Native American tribes, the proximity of the Spanish colonies in the south and French activity throughout the interior.In eastern Pennsylvania the Appalachian Valley, or Great Valley, was accessible by reason of a broad gateway between the end of South Mountain and the Highlands, and here between the Susquehanna and Delaware Rivers settled many Germans and Moravians forming the Dutch community, some of whom even now speak a unique American dialect of German known as the German language (also known as Pennsylvania Dutch). These were late comers to the New World forced to the frontier to find cheap land. With their followers of both German, English and Scots-Irish origin, they worked their way southward and soon occupied all of the Valley, ceded by the Iroquois, and the upper reaches of the Great Valley tributaries of the River, ceded by the Cherokee.By 1755, the obstacle to westward expansion had been thus reduced by half; outposts of the English colonists had penetrated the Allegheny and Cumberland plateaus, threatening French monopoly in the transmontane region, and a conflict became inevitable. Making common cause against the French to determine the control of the Ohio valley, the unsuspected strength of the colonists was revealed, and the successful ending of the and Indian War extended Englands territory to the Mississippi. To this strength the geographic isolation enforced by the Appalachian mountains had been a prime contributor. The confinement of the colonies between an ocean and a mountain wall led to the fullest occupation of the coastal border of the continent, which was possible under existing conditions of agriculture, conducing to a of purpose, a political and commercial solidarity, which would not otherwise have been developed. As early as 1700 it was possible to ride from Maine, to southern Virginia, sleeping each night at some considerable village. In contrast to this complete industrial occupation, the French territory was held by a small and very scattered population, its extent and openness adding materially to the difficulties of a disputed tenure. Bearing the brunt of this contest as they did, the colonies were undergoing preparation for the subsequent struggle with the home government. Unsupported by shipping, the American armies fought toward the sea with the mountains at their back protecting them against British leagued with the Aboriginals. The few settlements beyond the Great Valley were free for self-defence because debarred from general participation in the conflict by reason of their position.Image:Mont-carleton-panorama-3.jpg|thumb|Carleton, the tallest mountain in the Brunswick section of the Appalachian Mountains.Before the and Indian War, the Appalachian Mountains lay on the indeterminate boundary between Britains colonies along the Atlantic and French areas centered in the Mississippi basin.  After the French and Indian War, the of 1763 restricted settlement for Britains thirteen original colonies in North America to east of the summit line of the mountains (except in the northern regions where the Lakes formed the boundary).  Although the line was adjusted several times to take frontier settlements into account and was impossible to enforce as law, it was strongly resented by backcountry settlers throughout the Appalachians. The Proclamation Line can be seen as one of the grievances which led to the Revolutionary War. Many frontier settlers held that the defeat of the French opened the land west of the mountains to English settlement, only to find settlement barred by the British Kings proclamation. The backcountry settlers who fought in the campaign of Rogers Clark were motivated to secure their settlement of Kentucky.With the formation of the States, an important first phase of expansion in the late 18th century and early 19th century consisted of the migration of European-descended settlers westward across the mountains into the Ohio Valley through the Gap and other passes. The Canal, finished in 1825, formed the first route through the Appalachians that was capable of large amounts of commerce.See also* Appalachia* League* Mountain ClubNotes(References* Topographic maps and Geologic Folios of the United States Geological Survey* Bailey Willis, The Northern Appalachians, and C. W. Hayes, The Southern Appalachians, both in National Geographic Monographs, vol. i.* chaps, iii., iv. and v. of Miss E. C. Semples American History and its Geographic Conditions (Boston, 1903).* Further reading* Brooks, Maurice (1965), The Appalachians: The Naturalists America; illustrated by Lois Darling and Lo Brooks. Boston; Mifflin Company.* Caudill, Harry M. (1963), Night Comes to the Cumberlands. ISBN 0-316-13212-8.* Constantz, George (2004), Hollows, Peepers, and Highlanders: an Appalachian Mountain Ecology (2nd edition). West Virginia University Press; Morgantown. 359 p.* Weidensaul, Scott (2000), Mountains of the Heart: A Natural History of the Appalachians.  Fulcrum Publishing, 288 pages, ISBN 1-55591-139-0.Appalachian flora and fauna-related journals:* Castanea, the journal of the Appalachian Botanical Society.* Banisteria, a journal devoted to the natural history of Virginia.* The Journal of the Torrey Botanical Society.External links* Appalachian/Blue Ridge Forests images at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu (slow modem version)* Appalachian Mixed Mesophytic Forests images at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu (slow modem version)* University of Kentucky Appalachian Center* Forests of the Central Appalachians Project Detailed inventories of forest species at dozens of sites.ast:Apalachesdalarbe:()bg:ca:Apalatxespohoda:Appalachernede:Appalachenet:Apalatides:ApalachesMontojeu:Apalatxeakfo:Appalachiafjllfr:AppalachesSlibhte Apaliseachagl:ApalachesgorjeAppalachiais:Appalachiafjllit:AppalachiAppalachianilv:Apalailt:Apalaaihu:Appalache-hegysgnl:Appalachenja:no:Appalachenenn:Appalachaneoc:Apalachespl:Appalachypt:ApalachesApalairu:ApallaeMountainsvrchysl:Apalaisr:sh:Apalaifi:Appalakitsv:Appalachernatg:Dalaruk:Appalachianzh:
87410
Coral_reef
Coral reefs are underwater structures made from carbonate secreted by corals. Coral reefs are colonies of tiny living animals found in marine waters that contain few nutrients. Most coral reefs are built from corals, which in turn consist of polyps that cluster in groups. The polyps are like tiny anemones, to which they are closely related. But unlike sea anemones, coral polyps secrete hard carbonate exoskeletons which support and protect their bodies. Reefs grow best in warm, shallow, clear, sunny and agitated waters.Often called rainforests of the sea, coral reefs form some of the most diverse ecosystems on Earth. They occupy less than one tenth of one percent of the worlds ocean surface, about half the area of France, yet they provide a home for twenty-five percent of all marine species,(Mulhall M (2007) Saving rainforests of the sea: An analysis of international efforts to conserve coral reefs Duke Environmental Law and Policy Forum 19:321351.)including fish, molluscs, worms, crustaceans, echinoderms, sponges, tunicates and other cnidarians.(dateNovember, 2007)Paradoxically, coral reefs flourish even though they are surrounded by ocean waters that provide few nutrients. They are most commonly found at shallow depths in tropical waters, but deep water and cold water corals also exist on smaller scales in other areas.Coral reefs deliver services to tourism, fisheries and shoreline protection. The annual global economic value of coral reefs has been estimated at $US375 billion. However, coral reefs are fragile ecosystems, partly because they are very sensitive to water temperature. They are under threat from climate change, acidification, fishing, fishing for fish, overuse of reef resources, and harmful land-use practices, including urban and runoff and pollution, which  can harm reefs by encouraging excess algae growth.()()() Formation Most coral reefs were formed after the glacial period when melting ice caused the level to rise and flood the continental shelves. This means that most coral reefs are less than 10,000 years old. As communities established themselves on the shelves, the reefs grew upwards, pacing rising sea levels. Reefs that rose too slowly could become drowned reefs, covered by so much water that there was insufficient light.() Coral reefs are found in the deep sea away from continental shelves, around islands and as atolls. The vast majority of these islands are volcanic in origin. The few exceptions have tectonic origins where plate movements have lifted the deep ocean floor on the surface.In 1842 in his first monograph, Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs() Darwin set out his theory of the formation of reefs, an idea he conceived during the voyage of the Beagle. He theorized uplift and subsidence of the Earths crust under the oceans formed the atolls.() Darwins theory sets out a sequence of three stages in atoll formation. It starts with a reef forming around an extinct island as the island and ocean floor subsides. As the subsidence continues, the fringing reef becomes a barrier reef, and ultimately an reef.File:Atoll forming-volcano.png|Darwins theory starts with a island which becomes extinctFile:Atoll forming-Fringing reef.png|As the island and ocean floor subside, coral growth builds a reef, often including a shallow lagoon between the land and the main reef.File:Atoll forming-Barrier reef.png|As the subsidence continues, the fringing reef becomes a larger barrier reef further from the shore with a bigger and deeper lagoon inside.File:Atoll forming-Atoll.png|Ultimately, the island sinks below the sea, and the barrier reef becomes an atoll enclosing an open lagoon.Darwin predicted that underneath each lagoon would be a rock base, the remains of the original volcano. Subsequent drilling proved this correct. Darwins theory followed from his understanding that coral polyps thrive in the clean seas of the tropics where the water is agitated, but can only live within a limited depth range, starting just below low tide. Where the level of the underlying earth allows, the corals grow around the coast to form what he called fringing reefs, and can eventually grow out from the shore to become a barrier reef.File:Coral atoll formation animation.gif|thumb|right|A fringing reef can take ten thousand years to form, and an atoll can take up to 30 million years.(Animation of coral atoll formation NOAA Ocean Education Service. Retrieved 9 January 2010.)Where the bottom is rising, fringing reefs can grow around the coast, but coral raised above sea level dies and becomes white limestone. If the land subsides slowly, the fringing reefs keep pace by growing upwards on a base of older, dead coral, forming a barrier reef enclosing a lagoon between the reef and the land. A barrier reef can encircle an island, and once the island sinks below sea level a roughly circular atoll of growing coral continues to keep up with the sea level, forming a central lagoon. Barrier reefs and atolls do not usually form complete circles, but are broken in places by storms. Like sea level rise, a rapidly subsiding bottom subside can overwhelm coral growth, killing the animals and the reef.((The two main variables determining the geomorphology, or shape, of coral reefs are the nature of the underlying substrate on which they rest, and the history of the change in sea level relative to that substrate.The approximately 20,000 year old Great Barrier Reef offers an example of how coral reefs formed on continental shelves. Sea level was then  lower than in the 21st century.()() As sea level rose, the water and the corals encroached on what had been hills of the Australian coastal plain. By 13,000 years ago, sea level had risen to  lower than at present, and many hills of the coastal plains had become continental islands. As the sea level rise continued, water topped most of the continental islands. The corals could then overgrow the hills, forming the present cays and reefs. Sea level on the Great Barrier Reef has not changed significantly in the last 6,000 years,( and the age of the modern living reef structure is estimated to be between 6,000 and 8,000 years.() Although the Great Barrier Reef formed along a continental shelf, and not around a volcanic island, Darwins principles apply. Development stopped at the barrier reef stage, since Australia is not about to submerge. It formed the worlds largest barrier reef,  from shore, stretching for .(Four Types of Coral Reef Microdocs, Stanford Education. Retrieved 10 January 2010.)Healthy tropical coral reefs grow horizontally from  per year, and grow vertically anywhere from  per year; however, they grow only at depths shallower than  due to their need for sunlight, and cannot grow above sea level.()TypesThe three principal reef types are:* reef  this type is directly attached to a shore, or borders it with an intervening shallow channel or lagoon.* Barrier reef  a reef separated from a mainland or island shore by a deep channel or lagoon* reef  this more or less circular or continuous barrier reef extends all the way around a lagoon without a central island.File:Maldives small island.jpg|thumb|right|A small atoll in the MaldivesFile:Maldives - Kurumba Island.jpg|thumb|right|Inhabited cay in the MaldivesOther reef types or variants are:* Patch reef  this type is an isolated, comparatively small reef outcrop, usually within a lagoon or embayment, often circular and surrounded by sand or seagrass. Patch reefs are common.* Apron reef  a short reef resembling a fringing reef, but more sloped; extending out and downward from a point or peninsular shore* Bank reef  a linear or semicircular shaped-outline, larger than a patch reef* Ribbon reef  a long, narrow, possibly winding reef, usually associated with an atoll lagoon* Table reef  an isolated reef, approaching an atoll type, but without a lagoon* Habili - this is a reef in the Sea that does not reach the surface near enough to cause visible surf, although it may be a hazard to ships (from the Arabic for unborn).* Microatoll  certain species of corals form communities called microatolls. The vertical growth of microatolls is limited by average tidal height. By analysing growth morphologies, microatolls offer a low-resolution record of patterns of sea level change. Fossilized microatolls can also be dated using radioactive carbon dating. Such methods have been used to reconstruct Holocene levels.()* Cays  are small, low-elevation, sandy islands formed on the surface of coral reefs. Material eroded from the reef piles up on parts of the reef or lagoon, forming an area above sea level. Plants can stabilize cays enough to become habitable by humans. Cays occur in tropical environments throughout the Pacific, Atlantic and Oceans (including the Caribbean and on the Barrier Reef and Barrier Reef), where they provide habitable and agricultural land for hundreds of thousands of people.* When a coral reef cannot keep up with the sinking of a volcanic island, a seamount or guyot is formed. The tops of seamounts and guyots are below the surface. Seamounts are rounded at the top and guyots are flat. The flat top of the guyot, also called a tablemount, is due to erosion by waves, winds, and atmospheric processes.ZonesCoral reef ecosystems contain distinct zones that represent different kinds of habitats. Usually, three major zones are recognized: the fore reef, reef crest, and the back reef (frequently referred to as the reef lagoon).All three zones are physically and ecologically interconnected. Reef life and oceanic processes create opportunities for exchange of seawater, sediments, nutrients, and marine life among one another.Thus, they are integrated components of the coral reef ecosystem, each playing a role in the support of the reefs abundant and diverse fish assemblages.Most coral reefs exist in shallow waters less than fifty metres deep. Some inhabit tropical continental shelves where cool, nutrient rich upwelling does not occur, such as Barrier Reef. Others are found in the deep ocean surrounding islands or as atolls, such as in the Maldives. The reefs surrounding islands form when islands subside into the ocean, and atolls form when an island subsides below the surface of the sea.Alternatively, Moyle and Cech distinguish six zones, though most reefs possess only some of the zones.()File:Propagation du tsunami en profondeur variable.gif|thumb|right|Water in the reef surface zone is often agitated. This diagram represents a reef on a shelf. The water waves at the left travel over the off-reef floor until they encounter the reef slope or fore reef. Then the waves pass over the shallow reef crest. When a wave enters shallow water it shoals, that is, it slows down and the wave height increases.* The reef surface is the shallowest part of the reef. It is subject to the surge and the rise and fall of tides. When waves pass over shallow areas, they shoal, as shown in the diagram at the right. This means the water is often agitated. These are the precise condition under which corals flourish. Shallowness means there is plenty of light for photosynthesis by the symbiotic zooxanthellae, and agitated water promotes the ability of coral to feed on plankton. However, other organisms must be able to withstand the robust conditions to flourish in this zone.* The off-reef floor is the shallow sea floor surrounding a reef. This zone occurs by reefs on continental shelves. Reefs around tropical islands and atolls drop abruptly to great depths, and do not have a floor. Usually sandy, the floor often supports meadows which are important foraging areas for reef fish.* The reef drop-off is, for its first 50 metres, habitat for many reef fish who find shelter on the cliff face and plankton in the water nearby. The drop-off zone applies mainly to the reefs surrounding oceanic islands and atolls.* The reef face is the zone above the reef floor or the reef drop-off. It is usually the richest habitat. Its complex growths of coral and calcareous algae provide cracks and crevices for protection, and the abundant invertebrates and epiphytic algae provide an ample source of food.(* The reef flat is the sandy-bottomed flat can be behind the main reef, containing chunks of coral. The reef flat may be a protective area bordering a lagoon, or it may be a flat, rocky area between the reef and the shore. In the former case, the number of fish species living in the area often is the highest of any reef zone.(* The reef lagoon  many coral reefs completely enclose an area, thereby creating a quiet-water lagoon that usually contains small patches of reef.(However, the topography of coral reefs is constantly changing. Each reef is made up of irregular patches of algae, sessile invertebrates, and bare rock and sand. The size, shape and relative abundance of these patches changes from year to year in response to the various factors that favour one type of patch over another. Growing coral, for example, produces constant change in the fine structure of reefs. On a larger scale, tropical storms may knock out large sections of reef and cause boulders on sandy areas to move.()LocationsGrad Isotherme.png|thumb|300px|Boundary for 20C isotherms. Most corals live within this boundary. Note the cooler waters caused by upwelling on the southwest coast of Africa and off the coast of Peru.File:Upwelling image1.jpg|thumb|right|300px|This map shows areas of upwelling in red. Coral reefs are not found in coastal areas where colder and nutrient-rich upwellings occur.Coral reefs are estimated to cover ,(UNEP (2001) UNEP-WCMC World Atlas of Coral Reefs Coral Reef Unit) just under one tenth of one percent of the oceans surface area. The Indo-Pacific region (including the Sea, Ocean, Asia and the Pacific) account for 91.9% of this total. Southeast Asia accounts for 32.3% of that figure, while the Pacific including Australia accounts for 40.8%. Atlantic and Caribbean coral reefs account for 7.6%.(Spalding, Mark, Corinna Ravilious, and Edmund Green. 2001. World Atlas of Coral Reefs. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press and UNEP/WCMC.)Although corals exist both in temperate and tropical waters, shallow-water reefs form only in a zone extending from 30 N to 30 S of the equator. Tropical corals do not grow at depths of over . The optimum temperature for most coral reefs is , and few reefs exist in waters below .(Achituv, Y. and Dubinsky, Z. 1990. Evolution and Zoogeography of Coral Reefs Ecosystems of the World. Vol. 25:1-8.) However, reefs in the Persian Gulf have adapted to temperatures of  in winter and  in summer.(The Greenpeace Book of Coral Reefs)water coral can exist at greater depths and colder temperatures at much higher latitudes, as far north as Norway.() Although deep water corals can form reefs, very little is known about them.Coral reefs are rare along the American and African west coasts. This is due primarily to upwelling and strong cold coastal currents that reduce water temperatures in these areas (respectively the Peru, Benguela and Canary streams).(Nybakken, James. 1997. Marine Biology: An Ecological Approach. 4th ed. Menlo Park, CA: Addison Wesley.) Corals are seldom found along the coastline of Asia from the eastern tip of India (Madras) to the Bangladesh and Myanmar borders.( They are also rare along the coast around northeastern America and Bangladesh due to the freshwater release from the Amazon and Ganges Rivers, respectively.* The Barrier Reef&mdash;largest, comprising over 2,900 individual reefs and 900 islands stretching for over  off Queensland, Australia* The Barrier Reef System&mdash;second largest, stretching  from Contoy at the tip of the Peninsula down to the Bay Islands of Honduras* The Caledonia Barrier Reef&mdash;second longest double barrier reef, covering * The Bahamas Barrier Reef&mdash;third largest, following the east coast of Andros Island, Bahamas, between Andros and Nassau* The Sea&mdash;includes 6000-year-old fringing reefs located around a  coastline* Ridge&mdash;deepest photosynthetic coral reef, Florida* Numerous reefs scattered over the Maldives* The Ampat Islands in Indonesias West Papua province offer the highest known marine diversity.(NGM.natinalgeographic.com, Ultra Marine: In far eastern Indonesia, the Raja Ampat islands embrace a phenomenal coral wilderness, by David Doubilet, National Geographic, September 2007)BiologyLive coral are small animals embedded in carbonate shells. It is a mistake to think of coral as plants or rocks. Coral heads consist of accumulations of individual animals called polyps, arranged in diverse shapes.(Sherman, C.D.H. The Importance of Fine-scale Environmental Heterogeneity in Determining Levels of Genotypic Diversity and Local Adaption. University of Wollongong Ph.D. Thesis. 2006. Accessed 2009-06-07.) Polyps are usually tiny, but they can range in size from a pinhead to  across.Reef-building or corals live only in the zone (above 50 metres), the depth to which sufficient sunlight penetrates the water, allowing photosynthesis to occur. Coral polyps do not themselves photosynthesize, but have a symbiotic relationship with zooxanthellae; these organisms live within the tissues of polyps and provide organic nutrients that nourish the polyp. Because of this relationship, coral reefs grow much faster in clear water, which admits more sunlight. Without their symbionts, coral growth would be too slow for the corals to form significant reef structures. Corals get up to 90% of their nutrients from their symbionts.()Reefs grow as polyps and other organisms deposit calcium carbonate,(Stacy, J., Marion, G., McCulloch, M. and Hoegh-Guldberg, O. changes to Mackay Whitsunday water quality and connectivity between terrestrial, mangrove and coral reef ecosystems: Clues from coral proxies and remote sensing records -Synthesis of research from an ARC Linkage Grant (2004-2007). University of Queensland - Centre for Marine Studies. May 2007. Accessed 2009-06-07.)(Nothdurft, L.D. Microstructure and early diagensis of recent reef building scleractinian corals, Heron Reef, Great Barrier Reef: Implications for palaeoclimate analysis. Queensland University of Technology Ph.D. Thesis. 2007. Accessed 2009-06-07.) the basis of coral, as a skeletal structure beneath and around themselves, pushing the coral heads top upwards and outwards.(Wilson, R.A. The Biological Notion of Individual.Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. August 9, 2007. Accessed 2009-06-07.) Waves, grazing fish (such as parrotfish), urchins, sponges, and other forces and organisms act as bioeroders, breaking down coral skeletons into fragments that settle into spaces in the reef structure or form sandy bottoms in associated reef lagoons. Many other organisms living in the reef community contribute skeletal calcium carbonate in the same manner.(Jennings S, Kaiser MJ and Reynolds JD (2001) Marine fisheries ecology Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 291293. ISBN 9780632050987.) algae are important contributors to reef structure in those parts of the reef subjected to the greatest forces by waves (such as the reef front facing the open ocean). These algae strengthen the reef structure by depositing limestone in sheets over the reef surface.The colonies of the one thousand coral species assume a characteristic shape such as wrinkled brains, cabbages, table tops, antlers, wire strands and pillars.Table bottom.jpg|thumb|180px|left|Table coralCorals reproduce both sexually and asexually. An individual polyp uses both reproductive modes within its lifetime. Corals reproduce sexually by either internal or external fertilization. The reproductive cells are found on the mesentery membranes that radiate inward from the layer of tissue that lines the stomach cavity. Some mature adult corals are hermaphroditic; others are exclusively male or female. A few species change sex as they grow.Internally fertilized eggs develop in the polyp for a period ranging from days to weeks. Subsequent development produces a tiny larva, known as a planula. Externally fertilized eggs develop during synchronized spawning. Polyps release eggs and sperm into the water en masse, simultaneously. Eggs disperse over a large area. The timing of spawning depends on time of year, water temperature, and tidal and lunar cycles. Spawning is most successful when there is little variation between high and low tide. The less water movement, the better the chance for fertilization. Ideal timing occurs in the spring. Release of eggs or planula usually occurs at night, and is sometimes in phase with the lunar cycle (three to six days after a full moon). The period from release to settlement lasts only a few days, but some planulae can survive afloat for several weeks. They are vulnerable to predation and environmental conditions. The lucky few planulae which successfully attach to substrate next confront competition for food and space.File:Brain coral.jpg|coralFile:Staghorn-coral-1.jpg|coralFile:Cirripathes sp (Spiral Wire Coral).jpg|Spiral wire coralFile:PillarCoral.jpg|coralDarwins paradoxDuring his voyage on the Beagle, Darwin described tropical coral reefs as oases in the desert of the ocean. He reflected on the paradox that tropical coral reefs, which are among the richest and most diverse ecosystems on earth, flourish surrounded by tropical ocean waters that provide hardly any nutrients.Coral reefs cover less than one tenth of one percent of the surface of the worlds ocean, yet they support over one-quarter of all marine species. This diversity results in complex webs, with large fish eating smaller fish that eat yet smaller zooplankton and so on. However, all food webs eventually depend on plants, which are the producers. Coral reefs productivity is very high, typically producing 5-10g C m2 day1 biomass.()One reason for the unusual clarity of tropical waters is they are deficient in nutrients and drifting plankton. Further, the sun shines year round in the tropics, warming the surface layer, making it less dense than subsurface layers. The warmer water is separated from deeper, cooler water by a stable thermocline, where the temperature makes a rapid change. This keeps the warm surface waters floating above the cooler deeper waters. In most parts of the ocean, there is little exchange between these layers. Organisms that die in aquatic environments generally sink to the bottom, where they decompose, which releases nutrients in the form of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and potassium (K). These nutrients are necessary for plant growth, but in the tropics, they do not directly return to the surface.()Plants form the base of the food chain, and need sunlight and nutrients to grow. In the ocean, these plants are mainly microscopic phytoplankton which drift in the column. They need sunlight for photosynthesis, which powers fixation, so they are found only relatively near the surface. But they also need nutrients. Phytoplankton rapidly use nutrients in the surface waters, and in the tropics, these nutrients are not usually replaced because of the thermocline.(Around coral reefs, lagoons fill in with material eroded from the reef and the island. They become havens for marine life, providing protection from waves and storms.Most importantly, reefs recycle nutrients, which happens much less in the open ocean. In coral reefs and lagoons, producers include phytoplankton, as well as seaweed and coralline algae, especially small types called turf algae, which pass nutrients to corals.( The phytoplankton are eaten by fish and crustaceans, who also pass nutrients along the food web. Recycling ensures fewer nutrients are needed overall to support the community.Coral reefs support many symbiotic relationships. In particular, zooxanthellae provide energy to coral in the form of glucose, glycerol, and acids.(Zooxanthellae Whats That?) Zooxanthellae can provide up to 90% of a corals energy requirements.() In return, as an example of mutualism, the corals shelter the zooxanthellae, averaging one million for every cubic centimetre of coral, and provide a constant supply of the dioxide they need for photosynthesis.File:Multy color corals.JPG|thumb|right|The colour of corals depends on the combination of brown shades provided by their zooxanthellae and pigmented proteins (reds, blues, greens, etc.) produced by the corals themselves.Corals also absorb nutrients, including inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus, directly from water. Many corals extend their tentacles at night to catch zooplankton that brush them when the water is agitated. Zooplankton provide the polyp with nitrogen, and the polyp shares some of the nitrogen with the zooxanthellae, which also require this element.(Castro, Peter and Michael Huber. 2000. Marine Biology. 3rd ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill.) The varying pigments in different species of zooxanthellae give them an overall brown or golden-brown appearance, and give brown corals their colours. Other pigments such as reds, blues, greens, etc. come from colored proteins made by the coral animals. Coral which loses a large fraction of its zooxanthellae becomes white (or sometimes pastel shades in corals that are richly pigmented with their own colorful proteins) and is said to be bleached, a condition which, unless corrected, can kill the coral.Sponges are another key to explaining Darwins paradox. They live in crevices in the coral reefs. They are efficient feeders, and in the Sea they consume about 60% of the phytoplankton that drifts by. The sponges eventually excrete nutrients in a form the corals can use.()The roughness of coral surfaces is the key to coral survival in agitated waters. Normally, a boundary layer of still water surrounds a submerged object, which acts as a barrier. Waves breaking on the extremely rough edges of corals disrupt the boundary layer, allowing the corals access to passing nutrients. Turbulent water thereby promotes reef growth and branching. Without the nutritional gains brought by rough coral surfaces, even the most effective recycling would leave corals wanting in nutrients.()Cyanobacteria provide soluble nitrates for the reef via fixation.()Coral reefs also often depend on surrounding habitats, such as meadows and forests, for nutrients. Seagrass and mangroves supply dead plants and animals which are rich in nitrogen and also serve to feed fish and animals from the reef by supplying wood and vegetation. Reefs, in turn, protect mangroves and seagrass from waves and produce sediment in which the mangroves and seagrass can root.()BiodiversityFile:Callyspongia sp. (Tube sponge).jpg|thumb|300px|right|Tube sponges attracting fishes, glassfishes and wrassesCoral reefs form some of the worlds most productive ecosystems, providing complex and varied habitats that support a wide range of other organisms.() reefs just below tide level also have a mutually beneficial relationship with mangrove forests at high tide level and grass meadows in between: the reefs protect the mangroves and seagrass from strong currents and waves that would damage them or erode the sediments in which they are rooted, while the mangroves and sea grass protect the coral from large influxes of silt, fresh water and pollutants. This additional level of variety in the environment is beneficial to many types of coral reef animals, which, for example, may feed in the sea grass and use the reefs for protection or breeding.()Reefs are home to a large variety of organisms, including fish, seabirds, sponges, cnidarians (which includes some types of corals and jellyfish), worms, crustaceans (including shrimp, shrimp, lobsters and crabs), molluscs (including cephalopods), echinoderms (including starfish, urchins and sea cucumbers), squirts, turtles and snakes. Aside from humans, mammals are rare on coral reefs, with visiting cetaceans such as dolphins being the main exception. A few of these varied species feed directly on corals, while others graze on algae on the reef.(( Reef biomass is positively related to species diversity.()FishOver 4,000 species of fish inhabit coral reefs.( The reasons for this diversity remain controversial. Hypotheses include the lottery, in which the first (lucky winner) recruit to a territory is typically able to defend it against latecomers, competition, in which adults compete for territory, and less-competitive species must be able to survive in poorer habitat, and predation, in which population size is a function of postsettlement piscivore mortality.() Healthy reefs can produce up to 35 tons of fish per square kilometre each year, but damaged reefs produce much less.()Reef species include:*Fish that influence the coral feed either on small animals living near the coral, seaweed/algae, or on the coral itself. Fish that feed on small animals include Labridae (fish) who notably feed on organisms that inhabit larger fish, bullet fish and sea-urchin-eating Balistidae (triggerfish), while seaweed-eating fish include the Pomacentridae (damselfishes). Serranidae (groupers) cultivate the seaweed by removing creatures feeding on it (such as sea urchins), and they remove inedible seaweeds. Fish that eat coral itself include Scaridae (parrotfish) and Chaetodontidae (butterflyfish). *Fish that cruise the boundaries of the reef or nearby seagrass meadows include predators, such as Trachinotus(pompanos), groupers, mackerels, certain types of shark, barracudas and Lutjanidae (snappers).  Herbivorous and plankton-eating fish also populate reefs.  Seagrass-eating fish include horse mackerel, snapper, Pagellus (porgies) and Conodon (grunts).  Plankton-eating fish include Caesio (fusilier), ray, chromis, and the nocturnal Holocentridae (squirrelfish), Apogonidae (cardinalfish) and Myctophidae (lanternfish).Fish that swim in coral reefs can be as colorful as the reef. Examples are the parrotfish, Pomacanthidae (angelfish), damselfish, Clinidae (blennies) and butterflyfish. At night, some change to a less vivid color.InvertebratesSea urchins,  Dotidae and sea slugs eat seaweed. Some species of sea urchins, such as antillarum, can play a pivotal part in preventing algae from overrunning reefs.() Nudibranchia and anemones eat sponges.A number of invertebrates, collectively called cryptofauna, inhabit the coral skeletal substrate itself, either boring into the skeletons (through the process of bioerosion) or living in pre-existing voids and crevices. Those animals boring into the rock include sponges, bivalve mollusks, and sipunculans. Those settling on the reef include many other species, particularly crustaceans and polychaete worms.(AlgaeReefs are chronically at risk of algal encroachment. Overfishing and excess nutrient supply from onshore can enable algae to outcompete and kill the coral.()() In surveys done around largely uninhabited US Pacific islands, algae inhabit a large percentage of surveyed coral locations.(.) The algae population consists of algae, algae, and macroalgae.SeabirdsCoral reef systems provide important habitats for seabird species, some endangered. For example, Atoll in Hawaii supports nearly three million seabirds, including two-thirds (1.5 million) of the global population of albatross, and one-third of the global population of albatross.(The.honoluluadvertiser.com) Each seabird species has specific sites on the atoll where they nest. Altogether, 17 species of seabirds live on Midway. The albatross is the rarest, with fewer than 2,200 surviving after excessive feather hunting in the late19th century.()Othersnakes feed exclusively on fish and their eggs. Tropical birds, such as herons, gannets, pelicans and boobies, feed on reef fish. Some land-based reptiles intermittently associate with reefs, such as lizards, the marine crocodile and semiaquatic snakes, such as colubrina.  turtles eat sponges.File:Prionurus laticlavius.jpg|Schooling fishFile:Caribbean reef squid.jpg|reef squidFile:Stenopus hispidus (high res).jpg|coral shrimpFile:Triaenodon obesus moc.jpg|The reef shark almost exclusively inhabits coral reefs.File:Green turtle John Pennekamp.jpg|turtleFile:Red sea-reef 3627.jpg|clamFile:Nephtheidae komodo.jpg|Soft coral, cup coral, sponges and ascidiansFile:Laticauda colubrina (Wakatobi).jpg|sea kraitFile:Latiaxis wormaldi 002.jpg|The shell of wormaldi, a coral snailEconomic valueCoral reefs deliver services to tourism, fisheries and coastline protection. The global economic value of coral reefs has been estimated at as much as $US375 billion per year.() Coral reefs protect shorelines by absorbing wave energy, and many small islands would not exist without their reef to protect them. According to the group Wide Fund for Nature, the economic cost over a 25 year period of destroying one kilometre of coral reef is somewhere between $137,000 and $1,200,000.() About six million tons of fish are taken each year from coral reefs. Well-managed coral reefs have an annual yield of 15 tons seafood on average per square kilometre. Southeast Asias coral reef fisheries alone yield about $ 2.4 billion annually from seafood.(To improve the management of coastal coral reefs, another environmental group, the Resources Institute (WRI) developed and published tools for calculating the value of coral reef-related tourism, shoreline protection and fisheries, partnering with five Caribbean countries. As of April 2011, published working papers covered St. Lucia, Tobago, Belize, and the Dominican Republic, with a paper for Jamaica in preparation. The WRI was also making sure that the study results support improved coastal policies and management planning.() The Belize study estimated the value of reef and mangrove services at 395&ndash;559 million dollars annually.()ThreatsFile:Mvey0290.jpg|thumb|right|Island with reef off Yap, Micronesia()Coral reefs are dying around the world.( In particular, coral mining, agricultural and urban runoff, pollution (organic and inorganic), overfishing, fishing, disease, and the digging of canals and access into islands and bays are localized threats to coral ecosystems. Broader threats are sea temperature rise, sea level rise and pH changes from acidification, all associated with gas emissions.In El Nino-year 2010, preliminary reports show global coral bleaching reached its worst level since another El Nino year, 1998, when 16 percent of the worlds reefs died as a result of increased water temperature. In Indonesias Aceh province, surveys showed some 80 percent of bleached corals died. In July, Malaysia closed several dive sites where virtually all the corals were damaged by bleaching.()()To find answers for these problems, researchers study the various factors that impact reefs. The list includes the oceans role as a dioxide sink, atmospheric changes, light, ocean acidification, viruses, impacts of storms carrying agents to far flung reefs, pollutants, blooms and others. Reefs are threatened well beyond coastal areas.General estimates show approximately 10% of the worlds coral reefs are  dead.()(Save Our Seas, 1997 Summer Newsletter, Dr. Cindy Hunter and Dr. Alan Friedlander)() About 60% of the worlds reefs are at risk due to destructive, human-related activities. The threat to the health of reefs is particularly strong in Asia, where 80% of reefs are endangered.ProtectionMarine Protected Areas (MPAs) have become increasingly prominent for reef management. MPAs promote responsible fishery management and habitat protection. Much like parks and refuges, and to varying degrees, MPAs restrict potentially damaging activities. MPAs encompass both social and biological objectives, including reef restoration, aesthetics, biodiversity, and economic benefits. Conflicts surrounding MPAs involve lack of participation, clashing views, effectiveness, and funding. In some situations, as in the Islands Protected Area, MPAs can also provide revenue, potentially equal to the income they would have generated without controls, as Kiribati did for its Islands.()reserve, park, monument and heritage status can protect reefs. For example, Belizes Barrier reef, archipelago, Kaan, the Galapagos islands, Barrier Reef, Henderson Island,  Palau and Marine National Monument are world heritage sites.In Australia, the Great Barrier Reef is protected by the Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, and is the subject of much legislation, including a action plan.Inhabitants of Ahus Island, Province, New Guinea, have followed a generations-old practice of restricting fishing in six areas of their reef lagoon. Their cultural traditions allow line fishing, but not net or fishing. The result is both the biomass and individual fish sizes are significantly larger than in places where fishing is unrestricted.()()Artificial reefsEfforts to expand the size and number of coral reefs generally involve supplying substrate to allow more corals to find a home. Substrate materials include discarded vehicle tires, scuttled ships, subway cars, and formed concrete, such as reef balls. Reefs also grow unaided on marine structures such as rigs.In large restoration projects, propagated coral on substrate can be secured with metal pins, superglue or milliput.(Superglue used for placement of coral) Needle and thread can also attach A-hermatype coral to substrate.(Needle and thread use with soft coral)Low-voltage currents applied through seawater crystallize dissolved minerals onto steel structures. The resultant white carbonate (aragonite) is the same mineral that makes up natural coral reefs. Corals rapidly colonize and grow at accelerated rates on these coated structures. The electrical currents also accelerate formation and growth of both chemical limestone rock and the skeletons of corals and other shell-bearing organisms. The vicinity of the anode and cathode provides a high-pH environment which inhibits the growth of competitive filamentous and fleshy algae. The increased growth rates fully depend on the accretion activity.()During accretion, the settled corals display an increased growth rate, size and density, but after the process is complete, growth rate and density return to levels comparable to natural growth, and are about the same size or slightly smaller.( Origins Beginning a few thousand years after marine organisms developed hard skeletons, coral reefs emerged. The times of maximum development were in the Cambrian (513501 Ma), Devonian (416359 Ma) and Carboniferous (359299 Ma), due to Order Rugosa extinct corals, and Cretaceous (10065 Ma) and all Neogene (23 Mapresent), due to Order Scleractinia corals.Not all reefs in the past were formed by corals: Cambrian (542513 Ma) reefs resulted from calcareous algae and archaeocyathids (small animals with conical shape, probably related to sponges), and rudists, a type of bivalve, built Cretaceous (10065 Ma) reefs.OrganizationsOrganizations which currently undertake coral reef/atoll restoration projects using simple methods of propagation:* Coral Cay* International(The Coral Gardener-documentary about Counterpart scientist Austin Bowden-Kerby)* U.S. Coral Reef Task Force (CRTF)* National Coral Reef Institute (NCRI)* US Department of Commerces National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA): Coral Reef Conservation Program* National Center for Coral Reef Research (NCORE)* Ball* Southeast Florida Coral Reef Initiative (SEFCRI)* Foundation of the peoples of the South Pacific* WorldFishCenter: promotes sustainable mariculture techniques to grow reef organismsas tridacnidae* Coral Restoration Foundation (CRF) : Adopt a CoralOrganizations which promote interest, provide knowledge bases about coral reef survival, and promote activities to protect and restore coral reefs:* Coral Reef Society* Foundation(Biosphere Foundation)* Conservation Trust* Society of Pohnpei* Cay Conservation* Reef Care* Reef Alliance (CORAL) Coral Reef Alliance (CORAL)* Reef Targeted Research and Capacity Building for Management* Restoration Foundation* Triangle Initiative* Society* Reef Society* International* Earthwatch* Defense Fund* Solutions International* of Saba Marine Park* Coral Reef Alliance (GCRA) Global Coral Reef Alliance (GCRA)* Coral Reef Monitoring Network(Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network Status of Coral Reefs of the World 2008)* Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority* Fins* Mesoamerican Reef Alliance* Coral Reef Initiative (ICRI)(International Coral Reef Initiative)* Marinelife Alliance* Society for Reef Studies* Network* Conservation and Safety Organization* Conservation Group* Conservation Society* Reef Tourism Initiative (MARTI)* Moorea Coral Reef Long-term Ecological Research site(NSF Moorea Coral Reef Long-term Ecological Research site)* Conservancy* Voice International* PADI* Coral Reef Foundation(Planetary Coral Reef Foundation)* Action(Action coral reef restoration Practical Action)* Reefkeeper* ReefBase* Check* Relief(Reef Relief)* Reefwatch* Our Seas Foundation(Save Our Seas Foundation)* Seacology* SECORE* Underwater Federation* for Andaman and Nicobar Ecology* Foundation* Conservation International* WWFSee also* of Coral Reefs* biology* reefNotesReferences* Butler, Steven. 1996. Rod? Reel? Dynamite? A tough-love aid program takes aim at the devastation of the coral reefs. U.S. News and World Report, 25 November 1996.* Christie, P. 2005a. University of Washington, Lecture. 18 May 2005.* Christie, P. 2005b. University of Washington, Lecture. 4 May 2005.* * Courtney, Catherine and Alan White. 2000. Integrated Coastal Management in the Philippines. Coastal Management; Taylor and Francis.* Fox, Helen. 2005. Experimental Assessment of Coral Reef Rehabilitation Following Blast Fishing. The Nature Conservancy Coastal and Marine Indonesia Program. Blackwell Publishers Ltd, February 2005.* Gjertsen, Heidi. 2004. Can Habitat Protection Lead to Improvements in Human Well-Being? Evidence from Marine Protected Areas in the Philippines.* * Sadovy, Y.J. Ecological Issues and the Trades in Live Reef Fishes, Part 1* USEPA.* UNEP. 2004. Coral Reefs in the South China Sea. UNEP/GEF/SCS Technical Publication No. 2.* UNEP. 2007. Coral Reefs Demonstration Sites in the South China Sea. UNEP/GEF/SCS Technical Publication No. 5.* UNEP, 2007. National Reports on Coral Reefs in the Coastal Waters of the South China Sea. UNEP/GEF/SCS Technical Publication No. 11.External links*Coral Reefs- At the Smithsonian Ocean Portal*How Coral Reefs Work*International Coral Reef Initiative*International Year of the Reef in 2008*Moorea Coral Reef Long Term Ecological Research Site (US NSF)*ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies*NOAAs Coral-List Listserver for Coral Reef Information and News*NOAAs Coral Reef Conservation Program*Exhibition of the Mexican Caribbean coral reef biodiversity aquarium in Xcaret Mexico*NOAAs Coral Reef Information System*ReefBase: A Global Information System on Coral Reefs*National Coral Reef Institute Nova Southeastern University*Marine Aquarium Council*NCORE National Center for Coral Reef Research University of Miami*Science and Management of Coral Reefs in the South China Sea and Gulf of Thailand*NBII portal on coral reefs*Microdocs: 4 kinds of Reef & Reef structure*Reefrelieffounders.com: Coral reef resources, images, education, threats, solutions*Images Coral Reef of Gulf of Kutch* zh-min-nan:San--chiaugrebende coralltesda:Koralrevde:Korallenriffet:Korallrahude coraluharricorallienko:karangcorallinakorayrifasml:karangnl:Koraalrifja:no:Korallrevnn:Korallrevdi koralpl:Rafade coralde coralireeftesgrebenfi:Koralliriuttasv:Korallrevresifisan hzh:
88161
DM
DM, Dm, dm, or D.M. may stand for:Academia* of Management, an academic management degree* in Medicine, an academic medical degree* of Music, an academic music-performance degree, also known as D.M.AScience* Adamsite, a chemical agent used in riot control* decimetre, or decimeter, the symbol for the SI unit of length* myelopathy, a condition in dogs affecting the spinal cord* Dextromethorphan, an anti-coughing drug found in many preparations* mellitus, a disease characterized by high blood sugar* diagonal argument (diagonal metho), a mathematical proof of the uncountability of real numbers* mirror, a mirror with different transmittance or reflectance at two different wavelengths* measure, the amount of dispersion of radio waves by interstellar medium* morphology, a framework for theories of morphology in generative linguistics* matter, a measurement of the mass of something when completely dried* dystrophy, dystrophia myotonica, DM-1/2/3, a disease characterized by wasting of muscles* due to Memory, an event related potential differentiating between later remembered versus forgotten itemsComputing* mart, a specialized version of a data warehouse* mining, the process of automatically searching large volumes of data for patterns* Management, a standard for automatically updating the software on mobile phone* Device-mapper, a component of the Linux kernel that supports logical volume management* Mars, an American software company developing compilers* Direct Message, used at Twitter* (computing), Display Manager, a window system for Apollo/Domain workstations running AEGIS (Domain/OS)Game* (gaming), a gameplay mode integrated into first-person shooter computer games* Masters Trading Card Game, a collectible card game in Japan, Europe, North America* Master, the storyteller and referee in the role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons* monitor, a safety official at BDSM partiesCurrency* Mark (19482002), the former official currency of Germany* German mark (19511990), initially Deutsche Mark, the former official currency of East GermanyBusiness* market, the dominant distribution and retail network for North American comic books* marketing or direct mail, a type of marketing sending messages directly to consumers* Air, IATA code DM, a former Danish airline which operated from 1969 until 2005Military* marksman, a soldier fulfilling the marksman role in an infantry squad* Naval Armaments Depot, Defense Munitions, sites are prefixed DM* Davis-Monthan, Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, Tucson, AZ Music * Mouse (born 1977), an American musical artist and producer* Manatee, the second studio album by Animal Collective* Magnetic (2008), the ninth studio album by American heavy metal band Metallica* metal, a musical style evolving from thrash metal* Maybe (1994), the debut album of British rock band Oasis* major, the leader of a marching band* DrumMania, a music video game* Dm, a chord on D;Bands* Mode, an English synthpop band formed in 1980* Masquerade* Mundi, an Italian melodic death metal band from Turin* Moor, a Spanish heavy metal band from Madrid* Muse, an American electropop duo based in New York CityPlaces* Dominica, an island nation in the Caribbean Sea** DM, the nations 3166-1 alpha-2 code** .dm, the nations country code top-level domain* Moines, the capital of the state of Iowa in the United StatesPeople* Miller (born 1953), an American entertainer, stand-up comedian, TV personality* Malenko (born 1960), a pro wrestler* Miscavige (born 1960), a chairman of RTC (Religious Technology Center)* Mustaine (born 1961), a guitarist and songwriter of Megadeth Other * Marathon, a multiple-day charity event on U.S. college campuses* Danger Mouse (TV Series), a British animated television series* Motion, a video sharing website* Digital Monolithic, a Semiconductor prefix for their digital logic integrated circuits* Martens, a brand of boots* Midfielder, an association football position* Divemaster, a title in scuba diving* Dm3, and Dm, a Swedish locomotivescs:DM(flertydig)de:DMes:DMeo:Dmfa:DMfr:DMko:DMid:DMit:DMsw:DMku:Dmlv:DMlt:DMnl:DMja:DMno:DMpl:Dmpt:DMro:DMru:DMsr:DMfi:Dmsv:DMtr:DMzh:DM
89708
Blackface
Image:Minstrel PosterBillyVanWare edit.jpg|right|thumbnail|280px|This reproduction of a 1900 William H. West show poster, originally published by the Strobridge Litho Co., shows the transformation from white to black.Blackface is a form of theatrical makeup used in shows, and later vaudeville, in which performers create a stereotyped caricature of a black person. The practice gained popularity during the 19th century and propagated American racist stereotypes such as the happy-go-lucky darky on the plantation or the dandified coon .(For the darky/coon distinction see, for example, note 34 on p. 167 of Edward Marx and Laura E. Franeys annotated edition of  Yone Noguchi, The American Diary of a Japanese Girl, Temple University Press, 2007, ISBN 1-59213-555-2. See also Lewis A. Erenberg (1984), Steppin Out: New York Nightlife and the Transformation of American Culture, 18901930, University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0-226-21515-6 , p. 73. For more on the darky stereotype, see J. Ronald Green (2000), Straight Lick: The Cinema of Oscar Micheaux, Indiana University Press, ISBN 0-253-33753-4, p. 134, 206; p. 151 of the same work also alludes to the specific coon archetype.) In 1848, blackface minstrel shows were the national art of the time, translating formal art such as opera into popular terms for a general audience.(Behind the Burnt Cork Mask: Early Blackface Minstrelsy and Antebellum American Popular Culture by William J. Mahar, University of Illinois Press (1998) p. 9 ISBN 0-252-06696-0.) Early in the 20th century, blackface branched off from the minstrel show and became a form in its own right, until it ended in the United States with the U.S. Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s.(A History of the Minstrel Show  By Frank W. Sweet, Backintyme (2000) p. 25, ISBN  0939479214)Blackface was an important performance tradition in the American theater for roughly 100 years beginning around 1830. It quickly became popular overseas, particularly so in Britain, where the tradition lasted  longer than in the US, occurring on primetime TV as late as 1978 (Black and White Minstrel Show)() and 1981.() In both the United States and Britain, blackface was most commonly used in the minstrel performance tradition, but it predates that tradition, and it survived long past the heyday of the minstrel show. White blackface performers in the past used burnt cork and later greasepaint or shoe polish to blacken their skin and exaggerate their lips, often wearing woolly wigs, gloves, tailcoats, or ragged clothes to complete the transformation. Later, black artists also performed in blackface.Stereotypes embodied in the stock characters of blackface minstrels not only played a significant role in cementing and proliferating racist images, attitudes and perceptions worldwide, but also in popularizing black culture.(Lott, Eric. Blackface and Blackness: The Minstrel Show in American Culture Inside the minstrel mask: readings in nineteenth-century blackface minstrelsy Ed. Annemarie Bean, James V. Hatch, and Brooks McNamara. pp. 5-6) In some quarters, the caricatures that were the legacy of blackface persist to the present day and are a cause of ongoing controversy. One view is that blackface is a form of cross-dressing.(Blackface, White Noise: Jewish Immigrants in the Hollywood Melting Pot (1998) by Michael Rogin, University of California Press, p. 30 ISBN 0-520-21380-7)By the mid-20th century, changing attitudes about race and racism effectively ended the prominence of blackface makeup used in performance in the U.S. and elsewhere. It remains in relatively limited use as a theatrical device, mostly outside the U.S., and is more commonly used today as social commentary or satire. Perhaps the most enduring effect of blackface is the precedent it established in the introduction of American culture to an international audience, albeit through a distorted lens.()() Blackfaces groundbreaking appropriation,(((Inside the minstrel mask: Readings in nineteenth-century blackface minstrelsy by Bean, Annemarie, James V. Hatch, and Brooks McNamara. 1996. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.) exploitation, and assimilation( of African-American cultureas well as the inter-ethnic artistic collaborations that stemmed from itwere but a prologue to the lucrative packaging, marketing, and dissemination of African-American cultural expression and its myriad derivative forms in todays world popular culture.((Color-Blind Ideology and the Cultural Appropriation of Hip-Hop Jason Rodriquez, Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, Vol. 35, No. 6, 645668 (2006))(Darktown Strutters.  book reviews African American Review, Spring, 1997 by Eric Lott)HistoryDisplaying Blackness and the shaping of racist archetypesThere is no consensus about a single moment that constitutes the origin of blackface. Strausbaugh places it as part of a tradition of displaying Blackness for the enjoyment and edification of white viewers that dates back at least to 1441, when captive West Africans were displayed in Portugal.() Whites routinely portrayed the black characters in the Elizabethan and Jacobean theater (see Renaissance theatre), most famously in Othello (1604).( However, Othello and other plays of this era did not involve the emulation and caricature of such supposed innate qualities of Blackness as inherent musicality, natural athleticism, etc. that Strausbaugh sees as crucial to blackface.(  Hallam, Jr., a white actor using blackface makeup of Company fame, brought blackface in this more specific sense to prominence as a theatrical device in the United States when playing the role of Mungo, an inebriated black man in Padlock, a British play that premiered in New York City at the John Street Theatre on May 29, 1769.() The play attracted notice, and other performers adopted the style. From at least the 1810s, blackface clowns were popular in the United States.() British actor Mathews toured the U.S. in 18221823, and as a result added a black characterization to his repertoire of British regional types for his next show, A Trip to America, which included Mathews singing Possum up a Gum Tree, a popular slave freedom song.(Burrows, Edwin G. & Wallace, Mike. A History of New York City to 1898.  New York: Oxford University Press, 1999. p.489) Forrest played a plantation black in 1823,( and Washington Dixon was already building his stage career around blackface in 1828,() but it was another white comic actor, D. Rice, who truly popularized blackface. Rice introduced the song Jim Crow accompanied by a dance in his stage act in 1828() and scored stardom with it by 1832.()postcard, published circa 1908, shows a white minstrel team. While both are wearing wigs, the man on the left is in blackface and drag.Rice traveled the U.S., performing under the name Daddy Jim Crow. The name Jim Crow later became attached to statutes that codified the reinstitution of segregation and discrimination after Reconstruction.(Ronald L. F. Davis, Creating Jim Crow, The History of Jim Crow online, New York Life. Accessed 31 January 2008.)In the 1830s and early 1840s, blackface performances mixed skits with comic songs and vigorous dances. Initially, Rice and his peers performed only in relatively disreputable venues, but as blackface gained popularity they gained opportunities to perform as entractes in theatrical venues of a higher class. Stereotyped blackface characters developed: buffoonish, lazy, superstitious, cowardly, and lascivious characters, who stole, lied pathologically, and mangled the English language. Early blackface minstrels were all male, so cross-dressing white men also played black women who were often portrayed either as unappealingly and grotesquely mannish; in the matronly, mammy mold; or highly sexually provocative. The 1830s American stage, where blackface first rose to prominence featured similarly comic stereotypes of the clever Yankee and the larger-than-life Frontiersman;() the late 19th- and early 20th-century American and British stage where it last prospered() featured many other, mostly ethnically-based, comic stereotypes: conniving, venal Jews;(Jody Rosen (2006), album notes to Jewface, Reboot Stereophonic CD RSR006)() drunken brawling Irishmen with blarney at the ready;((Michael C. ONeill,  ONeills Ireland: Old Sod or Blarney Bog?, Laconics (eOneill.com), 2006. Accessed online 2 February 2008.)(Pat, Paddy and Teague, The Independent (London), January 2, 1996. Accessed online (at findarticles.com) 2 February 2008.) oily Italians;( stodgy Germans;( and gullible rural rubes.(1830s and early 1840s blackface performers performed solo or as duos, with the occasional trio; the traveling troupes that would later characterize blackface minstrelsy arise only with the minstrel show.() In New York City in 1843, Emmett and his Minstrels broke blackface minstrelsy loose from its novelty act and entracte status and performed the first full-blown minstrel show: an evenings entertainment composed entirely of blackface performance. (P. Christy did more or less the same, apparently independently, earlier the same year in New York.)() Their loosely structured show with the musicians sitting in a semicircle, a tambourine player on one end and a bones player on the other, set the precedent for what would soon become the first act of a standard three-act minstrel show.() By 1852, the skits that had been part of blackface performance for decades expanded to one-act farces, often used as the shows third act.()The songs of northern composer Foster figured prominently in blackface minstrel shows of the period. Though written in dialect and certainly politically incorrect by todays standards, his later songs were free of the ridicule and blatantly racist caricatures that typified other songs of the genre. Fosters works treated slaves and the South in general with an often cloying sentimentality that appealed to audiences of the day.(Key, Susan. Sound and Sentimentality: Nostalgia in the Songs of Stephen Foster. American Music, Vol. 13, No. 2 (Summer, 1995), pp. 145166.)White minstrel shows featured white performers pretending to be blacks, playing their versions of black music and speaking ersatz black dialects. Minstrel shows dominated popular show business in the U.S. from that time through into the 1890s, also enjoying massive popularity in the UK and in other parts of Europe.() As the minstrel show went into decline, blackface returned to its novelty act roots and became part of vaudeville.( Blackface featured prominently in film at least into the 1930s, and the aural blackface() of the n Andy radio show lasted into the 1950s.( Meanwhile, amateur blackface minstrel shows continued to be common at least into the 1950s.()As a result, the genre played an important role in shaping perceptions of and prejudices about blacks generally and Americans in particular. Some social commentators have stated that blackface provided an outlet for whites fear of the unknown and the unfamiliar, and a socially acceptable way of expressing their feelings and fears about race and control. Writes Eric Lott in Love and Theft: Blackface Minstrelsy and the American Working Class, The black mask offered a way to play with the collective fears of a degraded and threateningand maleOther while at the same time maintaining some symbolic control over them.()FilmThrough the 1930s, many well-known entertainers of stage and screen also performed in blackface.(One extensive list can be found at .) Whites who performed in blackface in film included Jolson,(Smith, Rj, Pardon the Expression (book review), Los Angeles Magazine, August 2001. Accessed online 2 February 2008.) Cantor,(John Kenrick, Blackface and Old Wounds. Musicals101.com. Accessed online 2 February 2008.) Crosby,( Astaire, Rooney, Temple and Garland.(In the early years of film, black characters were routinely played by whites in blackface. In the first known film of Toms Cabin (1903) all of the major black roles were whites in blackface.() Even the 1914 Uncle Tom starring African American actor Lucas in the title role had a white male in blackface as Topsy.() W. Griffiths Birth of a Nation (1915) used whites in blackface to represent all of its major black characters,() but reaction against the films racism largely put an end to this practice in dramatic film roles. Thereafter, whites in blackface would appear almost exclusively in broad comedies or ventriloquizing blackness (Michael Rogin, Blackface, White Noise:Jewish Immigrants in the Hollywood Melting Pot (1998), University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-21380-7, p. 79.) in the context of a vaudeville or minstrel performance within a film.() This stands in contrast to made-up whites routinely playing Native Americans, Asians, Arabs, and so forth, for several more decades.()Blackface makeup was largely eliminated even from live film comedy in the U.S. after the end of the 1930s, when public sensibilities regarding race began to change and blackface became increasingly associated with racism and bigotry.( Still, the tradition did not end all at once. The radio program Amos n Andy (19281960) constituted a type of aural blackface, in that the black characters were portrayed by whites and conformed to stage blackface stereotypes.(; the televised version (19511953) used African American actors.) The conventions of blackface also lived on unmodified at least into the 1950s in animated theatrical cartoons. Strausbaugh estimates that roughly one-third of late 1940s MGM cartoons included a blackface, coon, or mammy figure.() Bunny appeared in blackface at least as late as Fried Rabbit in 1953.()Black Minstrel ShowsImage:Bert Williams blackface 2.jpg|thumb|right|Williams was the only black member of the Follies when he joined them in 1910. Shown here in blackface, he was the highest-paid African American entertainer of his day.()By 1840, negro performers also were performing in blackface makeup. Douglass generally abhorred blackface and was one of the first people to write against the institution of blackface minstrelsy, condemning it as racist in nature, with inauthentic, northern, white origins.(Granville Ganter, He made us laugh some: Frederick Douglasss humor, originally published in African American Review, December 22, 2003. Online at HighBeam Encyclopedia. Accessed online 2 February 2008.) Douglass did, however, maintain that, It is something to be gained when the colored man in any form can appear before a white audience.(Frederick Douglass, Gavitts Original Ethiopian Serenaders, originally published in The North Star (Rochester), 29 June 1849. Online in Stephen Railton, Uncle Toms Cabin and American Culture, University of Virginia. Accessed online 31 January 2008.)When all-black minstrel shows began to proliferate in the 1860s, they often were billed as authentic and the real thing. These colored minstrels() always claimed to be recently-freed slaves (doubtlessly many were, but most were not)() and were widely seen as authentic. This presumption of authenticity could be a bit of a trap, with white audiences seeing them more like animals in a zoo() than skilled performers. Despite often smaller budgets and smaller venues, their public appeal sometimes rivalled that of white minstrel troupes. In March 1866, Booker and Claytons Georgia Minstrels may have been the countrys most popular troupe, and were certainly among the most critically acclaimed.()These colored troupesmany using the name Georgia Minstrels()focused on plantation material, rather than the more explicit social commentary (and more nastily racist stereotyping) found in portrayals of northern blacks.() In the execution of authentic black music and the percussive, polyrhythmic tradition of pattin Juba, when the only instruments performers used were their hands and feet, clapping and slapping their bodies and shuffling and stomping their feet, black troupes particularly excelled. One of the most successful black minstrel companies was Sam Hagues Slave Troupe of Georgia Minstrels, managed by Hicks. This company eventually was taken over by Callendar. The Georgia Minstrels toured the United States and abroad and later became Haverlys Colored Minstrels.(From the mid-1870s, as white blackface minstrelsy became increasingly lavish and moved away from Negro subjects, black troupes took the opposite tack.() The popularity of the Jubilee Singers and other singers had demonstrated northern white interest in white religious music as sung by blacks, especially spirituals. Some jubilee troupes pitched themselves as quasi-minstrels and even incorporated minstrel songs; meanwhile, blackface troupes began to adopt first jubilee material and then a broader range of southern black religious material. Within a few years, the word jubilee, originally used by the Fisk Jubilee Singers to set themselves apart from blackface minstrels and to emphasize the religious character of their music, became little more than a synonym for plantation material.() Where the jubilee singers tried to clean up Southern black religion for white consumption, blackface performers exaggerated its more exotic aspects.()African-American blackface productions also contained buffoonery and comedy, by way of self-parody. In the early days of African-American involvement in theatrical performance, blacks could not perform without blackface makeup, regardless of how dark-skinned they were. The 1860s colored troupes violated this convention for a time: the comedy-oriented endmen corked up, but the other performers astonished commentators by the diversity of their hues.() Still, their performances were largely in accord with established blackface stereotypes.()These black performers became stars within the broad African-American community, but were largely ignored or condemned by the black bourgeoisie. Monroe Trottera middle class African American who had contempt for their disgusting caricaturing but admired their highly musical culturewrote in 1882 that few who condemned black minstrels for giving aid and comfort to the enemy had ever seen them perform.(, including the quotation from Trotter.) Unlike white audiences, black audiences presumably always recognized blackface performance as caricature, and took pleasure in seeing their own culture observed and reflected, much as they would half a century later in the performances of Mabley.()Despite reinforcing racist stereotypes, blackface minstrelsy was a practical and often relatively lucrative livelihood when compared to the menial labor to which most blacks were relegated. Owing to the discrimination of the day, corking (or blacking) up provided an often singular opportunity for African-American musicians, actors, and dancers to practice their crafts.() Some minstrel shows, particularly when performing outside the South, also managed subtly to poke fun at the racist attitudes and double standards of white society or champion the abolitionist cause. It was through blackface performers, white and black, that the richness and exuberance of music, humor, and dance first reached mainstream, white audiences in the U.S. and abroad.( It was through blackface minstrelsy that African American performers first entered the mainstream of American show business.() Black performers used blackface performance to satirize white behavior. It was also a forum for the sexual entendre gags that were frowned upon by white moralists. There was often a subtle message behind the outrageous vaudeville routines:The laughter that cascaded out of the seats was directed parenthetically toward those in America who allowed themselves to imagine that such nigger showtime was in any way respective of the way we live or thought about ourselves in the real world.()With the rise of vaudeville, Antiguan-born actor and comedian Bert Williams became Ziegfelds highest-paid star and only African American star.((Margo Jefferson, Blackface Master Echoes in Hip-Hop, New York Times, October 13, 2004. Accessed online 2 February 2008.)poster for the 1939 Broadway show The Hot Mikado using blackface imageryIn the Owners Booking Association (TOBA), an all-black vaudeville circuit organized in 1909, blackface acts were a popular staple. Called Toby for short, performers also nicknamed it Tough on Black Actors (or, variously, Artists or Asses), because earnings were so meager. Still, TOBA headliners like Tim Moore and Johnny Hudgins could make a very good living, and even for lesser players, TOBA provided fairly steady, more desirable work than generally was available elsewhere. Blackface served as a springboard for hundreds of artists and entertainersblack and whitemany of whom later would go on to find work in other performance traditions. For example, one of the most famous stars of Haverlys European Minstrels was Sam Lucas, who became known as the Grand Old Man of the Negro Stage.(Johnson (1968). Black Manhattan, p. 90. Quoted in ) Lucas later played the title role in the 1914 cinematic production of Beecher Stowes Uncle Toms Cabin.(Uncle Toms Cabin (1914), IMDB. Accessed 31 January 2008.) From the early 1930s to the late 1940s, New York Citys famous Theater in Harlem featured skits in which almost all black male performers wore the blackface makeup and huge white painted lips, despite protests that it was degrading from the NAACP. The comics said they felt naked without it.()The minstrel show was appropriated by the black performer from the original white shows, but only in its general form. Blacks took over the form and made it their own. The professionalism of performance came from black theater. The black minstrels gave the shows vitality and humor that the white shows never had.   As the black social critic LeRoi Jones has written:The black minstrel performer was not only poking fun at himself but in a more profound way, he was poking fun at the white man. The cakewalk is  caricaturing white customs, while white theater companies attempted to satirize the cakewalk as a black dance. Again, as LeRoi Jones notes:If the cakewalk is a Negro dance caricaturing certain white customs, what is that dance when, say, a white theater company attempts to satirize it as a Negro dance?  I find the idea of white minstrels in blackface satirizing a dance satirizing themselves a remarkable king of ironywhich, I suppose is the whole point of minstrel shows.() Authentic or counterfeitThe degree to which blackface performance drew on authentic African American culture and traditions is controversial. Blacks, including slaves, were influenced by white culture, including white musical culture. Certainly this was the case with church music from very early times. Complicating matters further, once the blackface era began, some blackface minstrel songs unquestionably written by New York-based professionals (Stephen Foster, for example) made their way to the plantations in the South and merged into the body of African American folk music.()However, it seems clear that American music by the early 19th century was an interwoven mixture of many influences, and that blacks were quite aware of white musical traditions and incorporated these into their music.In the early years of the nineteenth century, white-to-black and black-to-white musical influences were widespread, a fact documented in numerous contemporary accounts.... It becomes clear that the prevailing musical interaction and influences in the nineteenth century American produced a black populace conversant with the music of both traditions.()Early blackface minstrels often said that their material was largely or entirely authentic to African-American culture; John Strausbaugh, author of Black Like You, said that such claims were likely to be untrue. Well into the 20th century, scholars took the stories at face value.() Rourke, one of the founders of what is now known as studies, largely assumed this as late as 1931.() In the Civil Rights era there was a strong reaction against this view, to the point of denying that blackface was anything other than a white racist counterfeit.() Starting no later than Robert Tolls Blacking Up (1974), a third wave has systematically studied the origins of blackface, and has put forward a nuanced picture: that blackface did, indeed, draw on African American culture, but that it transformed, stereotyped, and caricatured that culture, resulting in often racist representations of black characters.(;  passim.)As discussed above, this picture becomes even more complicated after the Civil War, when many African Americans became blackface performers. They drew on much material of undoubted slave origins, but they also drew on a professional performers instincts, while working within an established genre, and with the same motivation as white performers to make exaggerated claims of the authenticity of their own material.Author Strausbaugh summed up as follows: Some minstrel songs started as Negro folk songs, were adapted by White minstrels, became widely popular, and were readopted by Blacks, writes Strausbaugh. The question of whether minstrelsy was white or black music was moot. It was a mix, a mutt  that is, it was American music.()Darky iconographyImage:Golliwogg1.jpg|right|thumb|Kate Uptons Golliwogg in 1895, described as a horrid sight, the blackest gnome. Note the formal minstrel attire.The darky icon itselfgoogly-eyed, with inky skin; exaggerated white, pink or red lips; and bright, white teethbecame a common motif in entertainment, childrens literature, mechanical banks and other toys and games of all sorts, cartoons and strips, advertisements, jewelry, textiles, postcards, sheet music, food branding and packaging, and other consumer goods.In 1895, the Golliwogg surfaced in Great Britain, the product of American-born childrens book illustrator Kate Upton, who modeled her rag doll character Golliwogg after a minstrel doll she had in the U.S. as a child. Golly, as he later affectionately came to be called, had a jet-black face; wild, woolly hair; bright, red lips; and sported formal minstrel attire. The generic British golliwog later made its way back across the Atlantic as dolls, toy tea sets, ladies perfume, and in myriad other forms.  The word golliwog may have given rise to the slur wog.(The Golliwog Caricature, Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia, Ferris State University. Accessed online 31 January 2008.)thumb|left|Darky iconography frequently adorned the covers of sheet music from the 1870s through the 1940s, but virtually disappeared by the 1950s.U.S. cartoons from the 1930s and 1940s often featured characters in blackface gags as well as other racial and ethnic caricatures. Blackface was one of the influences in the development of characters such as Mickey Mouse.(Sacks and Sacks 158.) The Artists 1933 release Mellerdrammerthe name a corruption of melodrama thought to harken back to the earliest minstrel showswas a film short based on a production of Uncle Toms Cabin by the Disney characters. Mickey, of course, was already black, but the advertising poster for the film shows Mickey with exaggerated, orange lips; bushy, white sidewhiskers; and his now trademark white gloves.(Mickeys Mellerdrammer. Linen-mounted movie poster.  Hakes Americana & Collectibles, sales site.  Retrieved 01-14-2008.)thumb|right|Reproduction of an old tin sign advertising Picaninny Freeze, a frozen treat In the U.S., by the 1950s, the NAACP had begun calling attention to such portrayals of African Americans and mounted a campaign to put an end to blackface performances and depictions. For decades, darky images had been seen in the branding of everyday products and commodities such as Picaninny Freeze, the Chicken Inn(Coon Chicken Inn Photos and history of the restaurant chain.) chain and Darkie toothpaste (renamed Darlie) and Blackman mops in Thailand. With the eventual successes of the modern day Rights Movement, such blatantly racist branding practices ended in the U.S., and blackface became an American taboo.In Japan, in the early 1960s, a toy called Dakkochan became hugely popular. Dakkochan was a black child with large red lips and a grass skirt. There were boy and girl dolls, with the girls being distinguished by a bow. The black skin of the dolls was said to have been significant and in-line with the rising popularity of jazz. Novelist Kawano went as far as to state, We of the younger generation are outcasts from politics and society. In a way we are like Negroes, who have a long record of oppression and misunderstanding, and we feel akin to them. ()Modern-day manifestationsthumb|right|Example of Finnish licorice with darky imagery, which was changed in late 2007.Over time, blackface and darky iconography became artistic and stylistic devices associated with deco and the Jazz Age. By the 1950s and 60s, particularly in Europe, where it was more widely tolerated, blackface became a kind of outr, camp convention in some artistic circles. The Black and White Minstrel Show was a popular British musical show that featured blackface performers, and remained on British television until 1978. Many of the songs were from the hall, and western and folk traditions.(Minstrels founder Mitchell dies, BBC, 29 August 2002. Accessed 2 February 2008.) Actors and dancers in blackface appeared in videos such Joness Slave to the Rhythm (1980, also part of her touring piece A One Man Show)(Miriam Kershaw, Postcolonialism and androgyny: the performance art of Grace Jones, Art Journal,  Winter 1997, p. 5. Accessed online 17 July 2008 at FindArticles.com.) and Tacos on the Ritz (1984).()When trade and tourism produce a confluence of cultures, bringing differing sensibilities regarding blackface into contact with one another, the results can be jarring. Darky iconography is still popular in Japan today, but when Japanese toymaker Sanrio Corporation exported a darky-icon character doll (the doll, Bibinba, had fat, pink lips and rings in its ears)(Sherick A. Hughes, The Convenient Scapegoating of Blacks in Postwar Japan: Shaping the Black Experience Abroad, Journal of Black Studies (Sage Publications, Inc.), Vol. 33, No. 3, (January 2003), pp. 335353; p. 342. Accessed at http://www.jstor.org/stable/3180837 (subscription link), 14 May 2008.) in the 1990s, the ensuing controversy prompted Sanrio to halt production.(John Greenwald with reporting by Kumiko Makihara, Japan Prejudice and Black Sambo, Time Magazine, June 24, 2001. Accessed online 20 May 2008.)Foreigners visiting the Netherlands in November and December are often shocked at the sight of whites in classic blackface as a character known as Piet, whom many Dutch nationals love as a holiday symbol. Travelers to Spain have expressed dismay at seeing Conguito,() a tubby, little brown character with full, red lips, as the trademark for Conguitos, a confection manufactured by the LACASA Group. In Britain, Golly,() a golliwog character, fell out of favor in 2001 after almost a century as the trademark of jam producer James Robertson & Sons; but the debate still continues whether the golliwog should be banished in all forms from further commercial production and display, or preserved as a treasured childhood icon. In France, the chocolate powder Banania(http://www.banania.fr/ Bananias Official Website) still uses a little black boy with large red lips as its emblem.The influence of blackface on branding and advertising, as well as on perceptions and portrayals of blacks, generally, can be found worldwide.thumb|right|altA ice cream|Mexican chocolate ice cream; June 2010MexicoIn modern day Mexico there are examples of images (usually caricatures) in blackface (i.e.:Pingun). Though there is backlash from international communities, Mexican society has not protested to have these images changed to racially sensitive images. On the contrary, in the controversial Memn Pingun cartoon there has been support publicly and politically () (chancellor for Mexico, Ernesto Derbez). Currently in Mexico, only 34% of the population are composed of Afro-Mexicans (this percentage includes Mexicans).Netherlands and Flanders Zwarte PietImage:Zwartepiet2.JPG|thumb|left|A white Dutch woman in Piet costume.In Dutch and Flemish folklore, PietBlack Peteis a helper of Sinterklaas (Saint Nicholas). The addition of Zwarte Piet to the Saint Nicholas celebration is thought to have originated from a custom on the Dutch islands in the Waddenzee. Once a year young men would cover their faces in ashes and terrorize the streets. This blackening of the face was thought to make the men look like the devil, whom they expected to have a black face. In the past, Zwarte Piet was more identified with the chastising of bad children than the rewarding of the good, but both characters have softened since the mid-19th century, and today the December feast of Saint Nicholas is mainly an occasion for giving gifts to children.() Zwarte Piet inherited many of the classic darky icons, contemporaneous with the spread of darky iconography.() The children put their shoes in front of the fireplace, hoping to find a gift in it the next morning. Zwarte Piet is said to climb down the chimney and place the gifts. Children are told Zwarte Piet is black because of the soot. To this day, holiday revellers in the Netherlands blacken their faces, wear afro wigs and bright red lipstick, and walk the streets throwing candy to passers-by.Accepted without question in the past within an ethnically homogeneous nation, today there is some controversy regarding Zwarte Piet. Most people continue to enjoy this as a cherished tradition and look forward to his annual appearance, while others, especially overseas visitors, see him as a racist caricature() and fear  it shapes Dutch childrens perceptions of black people.(() As a result of the allegations of racism, some of the Dutch have tried replacing Zwarte Piets blackface makeup with face paint in alternative colors such as green or purple. This practice, however, was widely ridiculed and has since disappeared.( Piet weer zwart (Pete black again), De Telegraaf, November 15, 2007. Accessed online February 17, 2008.)South AfricaInspired by blackface minstrels who visited Town, South Africa in 1848, former Javanese and Malaysian slaves took up the minstrel tradition, holding emancipation celebrations which consisted of music, dancing and parades. Such celebrations eventually became consolidated into an annual, year-end event called the Coon Carnival but now known as the Cape Town Minstrel Carnival or the Klopse.Today, carnival minstrels are mostly Coloured (mixed race), Afrikaans-speaking revelers. Often in a pared-down style of blackface which exaggerates only the lips, they parade down the streets of the city in colorful costumes, in a celebration of Creole culture. Participants also pay homage to the carnivals African-American roots, playing spirituals and jazz featuring traditional Dixieland jazz instruments, including horns, banjos, and tambourines.() Former South African president Mandela endorsed the carnival in 1986, while it still bore the coon name.Some have denounced Blackface as an artefact of apartheid accusing broadcasters of lampooning off of disenfranchised African people who still do not control their images of self. Vodacom South Africa has been accused of using non-African actors in Blackface in its advertising as opposed to simple using African actors as principles. Others, mainly Whites, continue to see it as harmless fun.()United StatesImage:bface1.jpg|frame|left|150px|thumb|Promotional poster for Lees movie Bamboozled (2000)20th century examplesIn 1936 when the lead in touring company of Welles Voodoo Macbeth (Maurice Evans) fell ill, Welles stepped temporarily into the part and played the role in blackface.()An example of the fascination in American culture with racial boundaries and the color line is demonstrated in the popular duo Amos n Andy, characters played by two white men who performed the show in blackface. They gradually stripped off the blackface makeup during  live 1929 performances while continuing to talk in dialect. This fascination with color boundaries had been well-established since the beginning of the century, as it also had been before the Civil War.()In Orleans in the early 1900s, a group of African American laborers began a marching club in the annual Gras parade, dressed as hobos and calling themselves The Tramps. Wanting a flashier look, they later renamed themselves Zulus and copied their costumes from a blackface vaudeville skit performed at a local black jazz club and cabaret.() The result is one of the best known and most striking krewes of Mardi Gras, the Social Aid and Pleasure Club. Dressed in grass skirts, top hats and exaggerated blackface, the Zulus of New Orleans are controversial as well as popular.(The Zulu Parade of Mardi Gras, American Experience web site, PBS. Accessed 16 July 2008.)The wearing of blackface was once a traditional part of the annual Parade in Philadelphia. Growing dissent from civil rights groups and the offense of the black community led to a 1964 official city policy ruling out blackface.(John Francis Marion, Smithsonian Magazine, January 1981. On New Years Day in Philadelphia, Mummers the word. Archived version accessed 4 January 2008.) Also in 1964, bowing to pressure from the interracial group Concern, teenagers in Norfolk, Connecticut, reluctantly agreed to discontinue using blackface in their traditional minstrel show that was a fund-raiser for the March of Dimes.(Joseph A. OBrien, The Hartford Courant, January 30, 1964.http://proquest.umi.com/pqdweb?index4&did924241732&SrchMode1&sid1&Fmt10&VInstPROD&VTypePQD&RQT309&VNameHNP&TS1296684775&clientId20449. Accessed 3 February 2011.)Former Illinois congressman and House Republican party minority leader Michel caused a minor stir in 1988, when on the USA Today program he fondly recalled minstrel shows in which he had participated as a young man and expressed his regret that they had fallen out of fashion.(Sun-Times Editorial, Michel remarks insulting, Nov. 16, 1988)(Michel, Bob. My Sincere Apologies Chicago Sun-Times November 18, 1988)In 1993, white actor Danson ignited a firestorm of controversy when he appeared at a Club roast in blackface, delivering a risqu shtick written by his then love interest, African-American comedian Goldberg. Recently, gay white performer Knipp has used drag, blackface, and broad racial caricature while portraying a character named Q. Liquor in his cabaret act, generally performed for all-white audiences. Knipps outrageously stereotypical character has drawn criticism and prompted demonstrations from black, gay and transgender activists.(Blackface Drag Again Draws Fire Gay City News. Volume 3, Issue 308 | February 1925, 2004)21st centuryBlackface and minstrelsy also serve as the theme of Lees film Bamboozled (2000). It tells of a disgruntled black television executive who reintroduces the old blackface style and is horrified by its success.(Bamboozled (2000), IMDB. Retrieved 31 January 2008.)In recent years, there have been several inflammatory blackface incidents where white college students donned blackface as part of possibly innocent, but insensitive, gags, or as part of an acknowledged climate of racism and intolerance on campus. Such incidents usually escalate around Halloween, with students often acting out racial stereotypes.(Johnson, Sophie.Blackface incident ignites campus. Whitman College Pioneer, October 26, 2006. Retrieved on 11-27-2007.)(Walter, Vic.Gates Unfinished Business: Racism at Texas A&M. ABC News, The Blotter, November 10, 2006. Retrieved on 11-27-2007.)(Editorial. Blackface a Black Mark for Every Student The Daily Illini, October 31, 2007. Retrieved on 12207.)(Connolly, Joe.Blackface Makes Its Way To College Campuses. The Daily Orange, November 11, 2003. Retrieved on 112607.)figural lighter.jpg|thumb|right|This elaborate, figural Art deco Ronson tabletop cigarette lighter, manufactured in 1936, is an example of an everyday consumer item rendered in classic darky iconographical style.In November 2005, controversy erupted when journalist Gilliard posted a photograph on his blog. The image was of African American S. Steele, a politician, then a candidate for Senate. It had been doctored to include bushy, white eyebrows and big, red lips. The caption read, Is simple Sambo and Is running for the big house. Gilliard, also African American, defended the image, commenting that the politically conservative Steele has refused to stand up for his people.()In October 2009, a talent-search skit on Australian TVs Hey Its Saturday reunion show featured an Australian tribute group for Jackson, the Jackson Jive in blackface, with the Michael Jackson character in whiteface.  American performer Connick, Jr. was one of the guest judges and objected to the act, stating that he believed it was offensive to African-Americans, and gave the troupe a score of zero.  The show and the group later apologized to Connick, with the troupe leader of Indian descent stating that the skit was not intended to be offensive or racist.(Evelyne Yamine, Gareth Trickey and Chris Scott.  Hey Hey sees red over black face Jackson 5 act, The Daily Telegraph, October 08, 2009)In 2010 An episode of Always Sunny In Philadelphia comically explored if Blackface could ever be done right ()Commodities bearing iconic darky images, from tableware, soap and toy marbles to home accessories and T-shirts, continue to be manufactured and marketed in the U.S. and elsewhere. Some are reproductions of historical artifacts, while others are so-called fantasy items, newly designed and manufactured for the marketplace. There is a thriving market for such item in the U.S., particularly, as well as for original artifacts of darky iconography. The value of vintage negrobilia pieces has risen steadily since the 1970s.(Leah Dilworth (2003), Acts of Possession: : Collecting in America, Rutgers University Press, ISBN 0-8135-3272-8. p. 255.)United Kingdomthumb|right|190px|Reece Shearsmith as Papa Lazarou.A sketch in a 2003 episode of Britain features two characters who appear in blackface. The same characters, again in blackface, return for one 2005 sketch. In the sketches, the racist overtones are subverted with the characters presented as belonging to a race genuinely possessing the appearance of white men in blackface (referred to as Minstrels) who are persecuted by the public and local government in a similar manner to European government treatment of the people.The character of Lazarou was an evil character who appeared in two episodes of the TV show League of Gentlemen, who was regularly in blackface. He also appeared in blackface in the 2005 movie, League of Gentlemens Apocalypse, however it was revealed at the end of the series, when he dressed up as a Caucasian, that this was actually his skin colour.Other contextsThere are blackface performance traditions the origins of which stem not from representation of racial stereotype and are not in the stereotypical blackface mode. In Europe, there are a number of folk dances or folk performances in which the black face appears to represent the night, or the coming of the longer nights associated with winter. Many fall or autumn North European folk black face customs are employed ritualistically to appease the forces of the oncoming winter, utilizing characters with blackened faces, or black masks.(Masks: the Art of Expression edit. John Mack/pub. British Museum 1994 ISBN 0-7141-2507-5/The Other Within: Masks and masquerades in Europe Cesayo Dogre Poppi)File:Ganguro crop.jpg|thumb|left|Two Japanese ganguro in the subwayIn Bacup, Lancashire, England, the Britannia Coco-nut Dancers wear black faces. Some believe the origin of this dance can be traced back to the influx of Cornish miners to northern England, and the black face relates to the dirty blackened faces associated with mining.In Cornwall, UK several Day celebrations are held, these were sometimes known as Day and involved local residents dancing through the streets in blackface to musical accompaniment. Although the origins of blacking-up for Mummers Day have no racial connotations  the tradition going back to the days of the Celts  controversially, in the Padstow festival, a song with the words Hes gone where the good niggers go, was formerly included due to the popularity of minstrel songs during the 20th century.()In Japan, Ganguro, (from , lit. black face) was an alternative fashion trend of blonde or orange hair and darkened skin among young women that peaked in popularity around the year 2000, partly as a reaction against the traditional view of white skin being more beautiful and the consequent popularity of white make-up. (See also: Blackface, Shirabyshi, Geisha and Butoh.)File:HajjiFiruz.JPG|thumb|right|Firuz in TehranIn Nowruz celebrations in Iran, Firuz performers blacken their faces, and each wears very colorful clothes, usually  but not always  red, and always a hat that is sometimes long and cone-shaped. His songs, quite traditional in wording and melody, are very short repetitive.(Mahmoud Omidsalar, HJI FIRUZ  The Herald of Iranian New-Year, in CAIS, The Circle of Ancient Iranian Studies) Iranian-American scholars Bashi and Dabashi offer an anti-racist critique of the figure of Hajji Firuz and called for the elimination of the figure of Blackface from the Nowruz festivities. In their piece they write of the deeply racist figure of Blackface Hajji Firuz, doubtless a nasty remnant of slaves that were bought and sold and made into an object of ridicule at the same time. We have been horrified to see Iranians celebrate the Noruz here in the US in colorful parades down Avenue, an otherwise perfectly beautiful thing to do, while parading a figure of Hajji Firuz, much to the horror of African-Americans who cannot believe that in this day and age there are still people that flaunt such racist acts unconsciously. ()In the 1976 Soviet film How Tsar Peter the Great Married Off His Moor (  ,     ), the iconic singer Vysotsky performs the role of the Moor in blackface.In West African folk theatre and puppetry there is a tradition of satirical representation of white Europeans. Performers will wear white masks and white gloves. In the Yoruba Egungun festivals overly affectionate white couples are made fun of due to their unseemly and ridiculous behaviour.(Icons; Ideals and Power in the Art of Africa; Herbert M. Cole; National Museum of African Art; Washington DC and London; ISBN 0-87474-320-6; pp25-27) The imagery is very similar to the representation of white colonists, sometimes with a humorous undercurrent, in wood carvings from the same regions.(Art and Religion in Africa; Rosalind I.J. Hackett; Cassell 1996: ISBN 0-304-70424-5 p.193 quoting Babatunde Lawal, 1993, Oyibo: Representation of the Colonialist Other in Yoruba Art. Discussion Paper, Boston University.)In Thailand, actors darken their faces to portray the Negrito of Thailand in a popular play by King Chulalongkorn (18681910), Ngo Pa (), which has been turned into a musical and a movie.()LegacyDespite its racist portrayals, blackface minstrelsy was the conduit through which African-American and African-American-influenced music, comedy, and dance first reached the American mainstream.( It played a seminal role in the introduction of African-American culture to world audiences. Wrote jazz historian Giddins in Bing Crosby: A Pocketful of Dreams, The Early Years 19031940:In a specific example of this, from Ted Foxs Showtime at the ApolloMany of countrys earliest stars, such as Jimmie Rodgersand Wills, were veterans of blackface performance.(Nolan Porterfield, Jimmie Rodgers: The Life and Times of Americas Blue Yodeler (1979), University of Indiana Press, ISBN 0-252-00750-6. p. 261.)(Charles Townsend, San Antonio Rose: The Life and Music of Bob Wills (1986), University of Illinois Press, ISBN 0-252-01362-X, p. 45.)(Nick Tosches, Where Dead Voices Gather (2002), Back Bay, ISBN 0-316-89537-7, p. 66.) More recently, the American country music television show Haw (19691993) had the format and much of the content of a minstrel show.()The immense popularity and profitability of blackface were testaments to the power, appeal, and commercial viability of not only black music and dance, but also of black style. This led to cross-cultural collaborations, as Giddings writes; but particularly to the often ruthless exploitation and outright theft of African-American artistic genius, as wellby other, white performers and composers; agents; promoters; publishers; and record company executives.()(Barlow, William. Black Music on Radio During the Jazz Age, African American Review, Summer 1995.)()(Reich, Howard and Gaines, William.Jelly Roll Blues: The Great Jazz Swindle, Part 1 of 3. The Chicago Tribune, November 28, 2007. Retrieved on 11-29-2007.)(Whites, Blacks and the Blues, The Blues Teachers Guide, PBS. Retrieved on 12-18-2008.)While blackface in the literal sense has played only a minor role in entertainment in recent decades, various writers see it as epitomizing an appropriation and imitation of black culture that continues today. As noted above, Strausbaugh sees blackface as central to a longer tradition of displaying Blackness.(  To this day, he writes, Whites admire, envy and seek to emulate such supposed innate qualities of Blackness as inherent musicality, natural athleticism, the composure known as cool and superior sexual endowment, a phenomemon he views as part of the history of blackface.( For more than a century, when white performers have wanted to appear sexy, (like Elvis(Kolawole, Helen.He Wasnt My King. The Guardian Unlimited, August 15, 2002. Retrieved on 11-29-2007.)(: not about sexiness, but makes an explicit analogy between T.D. Rice with Jump Jim Crow and Elvis Presley with Hound Dog.) or Jagger( explicitly analogizes Al Jolsons style of blackface to Jagger and Eminem: not mockery, but the sincere mimicry of a non-Black artist who loves Black culture (or what he thinks is Black culture) so dearly he cant resist imitating it, even to the ridiculous point of blacking up.)); or streetwise, (like Eminem);((Cunningham, Daniel Mudie. Larry Clark: Trashing the White American Dream. The Film Journal. Retrieved on 2006-08-25) or hip, (like Mezzrow);(Roediger, David (1997). The First Word in Whiteness: Early Twentieth-Century European Immigration, Critical White Studies: Looking Behind the Mirror. Temple University Press, p. 355.) they often have turned to African-American performance styles, stage presence and personas.(: To this day, Whites admire, envy and seek to emulate such supposed innate qualities of Blackness as inherent musicality, natural athleticism, the composure known at cool and superior sexual endowment. Conversely, up to and including the Civil Rights era, aspirational black performers imitated white style: ) Pop culture referencing and cultural appropriation of African-American performance and stylistic traditionsoften resulting in tremendous profitis a tradition with origins in blackface minstrelsy.(The international imprint of African-American culture is pronounced in its depth and breadth, in indigenous expressions, as well as in myriad, blatantly mimetic and subtler, more attenuated forms.(Joel Hoard, Fa shizzle dizzle, its cultural appropriation-izzle, The Michigan Daily, April 19, 2004. Retrieved on 12-18-2008.) This browning,  la Rodriguez, of American and world popular culture began with blackface minstrelsy.( It is a continuum of pervasive African-American influence which has many prominent manifestations today, among them the ubiquity of the cool aesthetic(Southgate, Nick.Coolhunting, account planning and the ancient cool of Aristotle. Marketing Intelligence and Planning, Vol. 21, Issue 7, pp. 453461, 2003. Citation for the ubiquity. Retrieved on 03-02-2007.)(Robert Farris Thompson, An Aesthetic of the Cool, African Arts, Vol. 7, No. 1 (Autumn, 1973), p. 40-43, 6467, 8991. Citation for African (more specifically, Yoruba) origin of cool.) and hop culture.(MacBroom, Patricia. Rap Locally, Rhyme Globally: Hip-Hop Culture Becomes a World-Wide Language for Youth Resistance, According to Course. News, Berkeleyan. 2000-05-02. Retrieved on 2006-09-27.)See also*Morris*Eleven *song*Darlie*Black Sambo*Black Crows*(Pokemon)*of entertainers known to have performed in blackface*of blackface minstrel troupes*of blackface minstrel songsReferencesBibliography* * * * * Sacks, Howard L, and Sacks, Judith (1993). Way up North in Dixie: A Black Familys Claim to the Confederate Anthem. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press.* * * * ;Further reading* * * * * Abbott, Lynn, & Seroff, Doug (2008). Ragged but Right: Black Traveling Shows, Coon Songs, and the Dark Pathway to Blues and Jazz. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 1-57806-901-7.* External links;General* Blackface and other historic racial images from the Authentic History Center* Bambizzoozled  Blackface in Movies and Television* The Blackface Stereotype, Manthia Diawara* Cape Minstrel Festival Kaapse Klopse, Cape Town Magazine.* Recent blackface stories in the news, from the Colorblind Society* Zulu Blackface: The Real Story!* The New Era of Blackface, Louis Chude-Sokei* The History of Racist Blackface Stereotypes* Blacking Up: Hip-Hops Remix of Race and Identity;Zwarte Piet*http://web.archive.org/web/20060212153450/http://www.boomchicago.nl/Section/Videos/ZwartePiet?page2 Zwarte Piet?  Boom Chicago rap video satire of DMCs Christmas in Hollis*Expaticas Dutch News in English: Annual Zwarte Piet Debate*http://www.ferris.edu/news/jimcrow/question/jan05/ Who is Black Peter? from State University* Zwarte Piet film by Adwa Foundation, Rotterdam, and the Global Afrikan Congress*Zwarte Piet de:Blackfacefr:Blackfaceit:Blackfacepl:Blackfacesq:Blackfacesv:Blackface
91002
Upshur_County,_West_Virginia
Upshur County is a county located in the state of Virginia. As of the 2010 census, the population was 24,254. http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/54/54097.html. Its seat is the City of Buckhannon. Upshur County was formed in 1851 from Randolph, Barbour, and Lewis Counties and named for Parker Upshur, a distinguished statesman and jurist of Virginia. Upshur served as States Secretary of State and Secretary of the Navy under President Tyler.GeographyAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of 355 square miles (919 km), of which 355 square miles (919 km) is land and 0 square miles (0 km) (0.03%) is water.Major highways*20px Highway 33*23px Highway 119*20px Virginia Route 4*20px Virginia Route 20Magisterial districtsUpshur Countys six districts were formed on July 31, 1863:* Banks District, named for Prentiss Banks.* Buckhannon District, named for the county seat, the City of Buckhannon.* Meade District, named for General Gordon Meade.* Union District, named for military soldiers serving the Union cause.* Warren District, named for Kemble Warren.* Washington District, named for President Washington.Adjacent counties*Harrison County (north)*Barbour County (northeast)*Randolph County (southeast)*Webster County (south)*Lewis County (west)DemographicsImage:Upshur County Courthouse Buckhannon.jpg|thumb|250px|The Upshur County Courthouse, designed by architect Albright, pictured in Buckhannon in 2006As of the census of 2000, there were 23,404 people, 8,972 households, and 6,352 families residing in the county.  The density was 66 people per square mile (25/km).  There were 10,751 housing units at an average density of 30 per square mile (12/km).  The racial makeup of the county was 98.19% White, 0.62% Black or African American, 0.17% Native American, 0.31% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.13% from other races, and 0.58% from two or more races.  0.59% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 8,972 households out of which 31.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.20% were married couples living together, 9.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.20% were non-families. 25.20% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 2.92.In the county, the population was spread out with 22.60% under the age of 18, 12.60% from 18 to 24, 25.70% from 25 to 44, 24.50% from 45 to 64, and 14.70% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 94.20 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.40 males.The median income for a household in the county was $26,973, and the median income for a family was $32,399. Males had a median income of $29,020 versus $18,087 for females. The capita income for the county was $13,559.  About 16.00% of families and 20.00% of the population were below the line, including 27.30% of those under age 18 and 10.50% of those age 65 or over. Economy Economy includes mining and timber, as well as education - the Upshur County seat of Buckhannon is home to the small, private, liberal arts institution Virginia Wesleyan College. The Virginia State Wildlife Center in French Creek also generates some income as a popular tourist attraction.  Upshur County also unintentionally gained some international notoriety during the Mine disaster mine explosion on January 2, 2006, in the Sago Mine in Sago, near the Upshur County seat of Buckhannon. The blast and ensuing aftermath trapped 13 miners for nearly two days, only one of whom survived. It was the worst mining disaster in the US since a 2001 disaster in Alabama killed 13 people, and the worst disaster in West Virginia since a 1968 incident that killed 78 people. Cities and towns  Incorporated communities *City of Buckhannon Unincorporated communities Notable natives*Professor Brooks (19001993), noted biologist, naturalist and educator; born in, and long-time resident of, French Creek*Anne Phillips, (b. July 1952), novelist and story writer, born in Buckhannon*Coonts (born July 19 , 1946) novelist. American thriller and suspense novelist; born and grew up in Buckhannon See also *National Register of Historic Places listings in Upshur County, West Virginia* Mine disaster* Virginia Wesleyan College* Virginia State Wildlife Center Some tourist attractionsStrawberry festivalWest Virginias largest Yard saleReferences(External links*Buckhannon-Upshur Chamber of Commerce*Upshur County Board of Education*Upshur County Development Authority*Upshur County Public Library*Upshur County Historical Society*The Record Delta newspaper*West Virginia Strawberry Festival*Upshur County WVGenWeb(,  )County (West Virginia)de Upshur (Virginia Occidental)County (Okcidenta Virginio)dUpshur (Virginie-Occidentale),  di Upshur (Virginia Occidentale)Upshur, Virjynni WestCounty (West Virginia)County (Vest-Virginia)County (West-Virginia)de Upshur (Virgnia Ocidental)County, West Virginia(,  )Upshur, Ty Virginia()
91318
Fredericksburg,_Virginia
Independent from Spotsylvania County in 1879Fredericksburg is an city in the of Virginia located  south of D.C., and  north of Richmond. As of the 2010 census, the city had a population of 24,286(http://www.coopercenter.org/demographics. Weldon Cooper Center 2010 Census Count Retrieved September 9, 2011). The of Economic Analysis combines the city of Fredericksburg with neighboring Spotsylvania County for statistical purposes.Located near where the River crosses the Line, Fredericksburg was a prominent port in Virginia during the colonial era. During the Civil War, the town, located halfway between the capitals of the opposing forces, was the site of the of Fredericksburg and Battle of Fredericksburg, preserved in part as the and Spotsylvania National Military Park. Tourism is a major part of the economy, with approximately 1.5 million people visiting the Fredericksburg area annually, including the battlefield park, the downtown visitor center, events, museums and historic sites.(Official web site of the city of Fredericksburg, Virginia)Fredericksburg is the commercial hub of a rapidly growing region in northern Central Virginia, and is the largest city between Richmond and the Metro Washington area. Major commercial centers include Central Park (as of 2004, the second-largest mall on the East Coast) and Towne Centre, located in Spotsylvania County adjacent to the city line. Major employers include the University of Mary Washington and Mary Washington Hospital. Many Fredericksburg-area residents commute to work by car, bus, and rail to Richmond, Fairfax, Prince William County, and Arlington, as well as Washington, D.C. This has led to Fredericksburg becoming a part of Virginia not only geographically, but also culturally.()()()()HistoryLocated on the River near the head of navigation at the line, Fredericksburg developed as the frontier of colonial Virginia shifted west out of the coastal plain. The land on which the city was founded was part of a tract patented in 1671. The General Assembly established a fort on the Rappahannock in 1676, just below the present-day city. In 1714, Lt. Gov. Spotswood sponsored a German settlement called Germanna on the River, a tributary of the Rappahannock upstream from the future site of the city, and led an expedition westward over the Ridge Mountains in 1716.As interest in the frontier grew, the colonial assembly responded by forming a new county named Spotsylvania (after the governor) in 1720 and establishing Fredericksburg in 1728 as a port for the county, of which it was then a part. Named for Prince of Wales, son of King George II, the colonial towns streets bore the names of members of the royal family. The county court was moved to Fredericksburg in 1732, and the town served as seat until 1780, when the courthouse was moved closer to the county center. Fredericksburg was incorporated as a town, with its own court, council, and mayor, in 1781. It received its charter as an city in 1879. The city adopted its present city manager/council form of government in 1911.The city has close associations with Washington, whose family moved to Farm in Stafford County just off the River opposite Fredericksburg in 1738. Washingtons mother Mary later moved to the city, and his sister Betty lived at Kenmore, a plantation house then outside the city. Other significant early residents include the Revolutionary War generals Mercer and Weedon, naval war hero Paul Jones, and future U.S. president Monroe. Thomas Jefferson wrote the Statute for Religious Freedom in Fredericksburg.The citys development and success was based on other significant residents, enslaved Africans with varied skills, who were critical to its growth. Slaves worked on plantations, on the docks, in iron industries, mining and quarries, mercantile businesses, construction, domestic services, and others were skilled blacksmiths, coopers, cobblers, and draymen. African Americans were vital in the development of the area.(Ruth Coder Fitzgerald, A Different Story: A Black History of Fredericksburg, Stafford, and Spotsylvania, Fredericksburg.com, accessed 12 April 2009)During the 19th century, Fredericksburg sought to maintain its sphere of trade but with limited success. It promoted the development of a canal on the Rappahannock and construction of a turnpike and road to bind the interior country to the market town. By 1837, a north-south railroad, which became the Fredericksburg and Potomac Railroad, linked the town to Richmond, the state capital. A much-needed railroad joining the town to the farming region to the west was not finished until after the Civil War.File:Fredericksburg1862.jpg|thumb|300px|right|Fredericksburg, Virginia, March 1863. View from across the River. To the right is the steeple of the Baptist Church and toward the center is the tower of St. Georges Church.During the Civil War, Fredericksburg gained strategic importance due to its location midway between Washington and Richmond, the opposing capitals of the Union and the Confederacy. During the of Fredericksburg, December 1115, 1862, the town sustained significant damage from bombardment and looting by the Union forces. A Battle of Fredericksburg was fought in and around the town on May 3, 1863, in connection with the Chancellorsville campaign (April 27, 1863  May 6, 1863). The battles of the Wilderness and Spotsylvania Court House were fought nearby in May 1864.After the war, Fredericksburg recovered its former position as a center of local trade and slowly grew beyond its prewar boundaries. The of Mary Washington was founded there in 1908 as the State Normal and Industrial School for Women. Adopting the name of Mary Washington College in 1938, the college was for many years associated with the of Virginia as a womens liberal arts college. The college became independent of UVA and began to accept men in 1970. Recently, the college changed names from Mary Washington College to the University of Mary Washington. A separate campus for graduate and professional studies is located in suburban Stafford County.The chord of modern guitar was first developed by Wray in Fredericksburg in 1958 during his first improvisation of the instrumental piece Rumble, a single released by Wray & His Ray Men.() The local music scene includes a wide variety of genres.GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of . None of the area is covered with water. The city is part of the boundary between the Piedmont and Tidewater regions, and as such is located on the line, as evidently seen on the River. US-1, US-17, and I-95 all pass through the city, which is located approximately  from D.C.The city is bounded on the north and east by the Rappahannock River; across the river is Stafford County. The city is bounded on the south and west by Spotsylvania County.ClimateFredericksburg has a four-season subtropical climate (Kppen Cfa), with slightly cool winters and hot, humid summers. Note that some of the statistics for the city centre may be different than what is presented below due to the park location of the station used.dateAugust 2010DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 19,279 people, 8,102 households, and 3,925 families residing in the city. The density was 1,833.0 people per square mile (707.6/km). There were 8,888 housing units at an average density of 845.0 per square mile (326.2/km). The racial makeup of the city was 73.18% White, 20.41% Black or African American, 0.34% Native American, 1.51% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 2.56% from other races, and 1.95% from two or more races. 4.90% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 8,102 households out of which 21.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 31.8% were married couples living together, 13.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 51.6% were non-families. 39.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.09 and the average family size was 2.81.In the city the population was spread out with 17.8% under the age of 18, 23.8% from 18 to 24, 27.2% from 25 to 44, 18.4% from 45 to 64, and 12.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females there were 81.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 78.4 males.The median income for a household in the city was $34,585, and the median income for a family was $47,148. Males had a median income of $33,641 versus $25,037 for females. The capita income for the city was $21,527. 15.5% of the population and 10.4% of families were below the line. Out of the total population, 19.9% of those under the age of 18 and 8.8% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.CrimeFor the year of 2006 the overall crime index was 4981.1 per 100,000 civilians. The national average was 4479.3 per 100,000 people. Fredericksburgs crime was below the national average in all categories except for rape and crimes.(Fredericksburg Crime Statistics and Crime Data (Fredericksburg, VA)) The following table shows Fredericksburgs crime rate in comparison with the national average in 6 categories that Quitno uses in their calculation for Americas most dangerous cities ranking. The statistics provided are not for the actual amount of crimes committed, but how many crimes committed capita. Fredericksburg is known for its unusually high rape rate, which in 2006 was over twice the national average.(Fredericksburg, Virginia (VA) profile: population, maps, real estate, averages, homes, statistics, relocation, travel, jobs, hospitals, schools, crime, moving, houses, sex off...)Culture and recreationArchitecture and historic sites refnum  71001053()Despite recent decades of suburban growth, reminders of the areas past abound. The 40-block Fredericksburg Historic District, on the Register of Historic Places, embraces the citys downtown area and contains more than 350 buildings dating to the 18th and 19th centuries. Crowds of tourists are drawn to the historic district of Fredericksburg during the summer months.Within the historic district, four 18th-century historic sites are run by Virginia: the Washington House, where George Washingtons mother spent her final years; the late 18th century Rising Sun Tavern and the Hugh Mercer Apothecary Shop (the fourth is only open on Garden Week. Sites from the 19th century include the James Monroe Law Office Museum. Important public buildings include the 1852 courthouse designed by Renwick, whose works include the Institutions castle building in Washington and St. Patricks Cathedral in New York City, and the 1816 town hall and market house. The latter building now houses the Fredericksburg Area Museum and Cultural Center. Another site of interest is St. Georges Church.Nearby the historic district is Kenmore, the plantation home of Washingtons sister Betty and her husband patriot Lewis.The areas Civil War battles are commemorated in and Spotsylvania National Military Park. Formed by an act of Congress in 1927, the national military park preserves portions of the battlefields of Fredericksburg, Chancellorsville, the Wilderness, and Spotsylvania Court House. The National Cemetery, also part of the park, is located on Maryes Heights on the Fredericksburg battlefield and contains more than 15,000 Union burials from the areas battlefields.Notable 20th-century sites and structures include the campus of the of Mary Washington (begun in 1911), and Ice Cream, an Art Moderne roadside ice cream stand on the National Register of Historic Places on 1.Nearby points of interest include Farm historic site in Stafford County where Washington spent his boyhood immediately across the river from Fredericksburg, and the Washington Birthplace National Monument, located 38 miles to the east in Westmoreland County. The historic community of Falmouth lies across the Rappahannock to the north and includes the historic house Belmont, home of American Impressionist artist Melchers.ParksPublic parks run by the city include:() * Mill Park* Spring Park(Historypoint.org)* Park* Dixon Park* City DocksEducationFile:Monroe Hall UMW.jpg|thumb|right|250px|Monroe Hall, built in 1911, at the of Mary Washington.Primary & Secondary SchoolsThe Fredericksburg City Public Schools are run independent of the surrounding counties. The public primary and secondary schools include:() *James Monroe High School*Walker-Grant Middle School*Hugh Mercer *Lafayette Upper Elementary SchoolPrivate schools include:*AcademyHigher EducationThe of Mary Washington, established in 1908 and opening in 1911, is a four-year public university within the city.MediaFredericksburgs daily newspaper is Free LanceStar. The Free Lance was first published in 1885, and competed with two twice-weekly papers in the city during the late 19th century, the Fredericksburg News and The Virginia Star. While the News folded in 1884, the Star company began publishing the Daily Star in 1893. In 1900, the two companies merged, with both newspapers continuing publication until 1926, when they merged under the present title. Since that time, the Free LanceStar has been owned and operated by members of the Rowe family of Fredericksburg.Fredericksburg and the nearby region have several radio stations, including(on the FM dial) WWED (89.5, Christian), WJYJ (90.5, Christian), WFLS (93.3, country), WGRQ (95.9, SuperHits, licensed to nearby Fairview Beach), WWUZ (96.9, classic rock, licensed to nearby Bowling Green), WVBX (99.3, The Vibe, rhythmic contemporary, licensed to nearby Spotsylvania), WBQB (B-101.5, adult contemporary) and WGRX (Thunder 104.5, country, licensed to nearby Falmouth). Fredericksburg AM stations include WFVA (1230, nostalgia) and WNTX (1350, talk, news, and sports). WGRQ and WGRX are owned locally by Telemedia Broadcasting. WFLS, WWUZ, WVBX, and WYSK are owned by the Free LanceStar Company.In 2001, the Arbitron media service began listing the Fredericksburg area as a nationally rated radio market. As of the fall of 2005, the area ranked 154th out of 297 markets surveyed, with a total market population of more than 280,000. Large broadcast companies like Channel Communications and Broadcasting are not active in the local market; almost all of its stations remain locally or regionally owned.SportsThere are no professional sports teams in Fredericksburg, however, there are a number of amateur and academic teams. Sports at the secondary education are run through the Virginia High School League. On the collegiate level are the of Mary Washington Eagles. Other amateur athletics include the Hotspur(The Gunners were founded 2006 and folded in 2010, Hotspur) of Soccer Leagues Development League (PDL); and the Rugby Club a senior mens rugby club competing in Division III of the Potomac Rugby Union.TransportationImage:Fredericksburg Amtrak station.jpg|thumb|220px|The Fredericksburg train station, formerly of the Fredericksburg, and Potomac Railroad.Fredericksburg is traversed by a series of rural and suburban four-lane highways and a multitude of small, two-lane roads. Among the major arterial roads is U.S. Route 1, providing north-south transportation from the region to Stafford, Washington D.C., and points beyond. Route 3 (Plank Road) is a major east-west route that connects downtown Fredericksburg (via the Blue and Gray Parkway bypass), southern Stafford and King George counties, and Route 301 with the large shopping centers, Spotsylvania Town Center and Central Park. To the west, Route 3 reaches Culpeper, where it meets Route 29 and Route 15.Most of Fredericksburgs traffic flow is to or from the north (Washington D.C. metropolitan area) during peak commuting hours, primarily via Interstate 95 and US-1. The US-1 bridge over the Rappahannock River is often a traffic bottleneck, and Route 3 has become increasingly jammed as residential development has grown west.As an alternative to I-95, commuters also use the Railway Express rail service to Washington. Long-distance rail service is available on Amtrak, which serves Fredericksburg via the Northeast Regional and Carolinian/Piedmont routes. FRED is a recently started bus service in Fredericksburg which serves most area communities, retail shopping centers, two VRE stations, and downtown Fredericksburg.Notable residents and nativesFile:Civil-war-035.jpg|thumb|right|220px|Wounded soldiers being tended at Maryes House in Fredericksburg in May 1864. (Sometimes mistakenly labeled as taken in the field after the of Chancellorsville, May 2, 1863).File:trenches petersburg.jpg|thumb|220px|right|Civil War: Army Soldiers of 6th Corps, of the Potomac, in trenches before storming Maryes Heights at the Battle of Fredericksburg during the Chancellorsville campaign, Virginia, May 1863. (#B-157) Sometimes mistakenly labeled as taken at siege of Virginia18th century and before* Washington, 1st President of the States, leader of the Revolutionary War* Ball Washington* Craig, Baptist preacher imprisoned for religious freedom issues before the Revolution; leader of the Church that migrated to Kentucky* Crist, former States Representative from Kentucky* Paul Jones* Lewis and Elizabeth Betty Washington* Mercer* Monroe* Washington* Weedon19th century to present* Ackermann, guitarist and vocalist for Place To Bury Strangers* Binford, artist* Bumbry, baseball player* Cameron, America 2010* Coghill, Broncos* Crawley, historian* L. Farmer, Jr., civil rights leader* Hartley, radio show host* Jones, professional soccer player* King, author of Southern Ladies and Gentlemen, and Confessions of a Failed Southern Lady* Lenzi, Olympic diver and gold medalist* Maine, York Mets starting pitcher* Danny McBride, actor()* McKeown, musician* C. Rawlings, House of Delegates* Reinhold, actor* Rouse, Olympic swimmer, gold medalist and former world record holder* Smalley, musician, member of All, Nasty, Down by Law, Sharpshooters* P. Taylor, congressman* Williams, musician* Williams, basketball player* Kim rapper in the Korean pop group U-KISSSister cities* Frjus, France* Princes Town, GhanaReferencesExternal links* * Fredericksburg Masonic Lodge - George Washingtons Mother Lodge* U.S. National Slavery Museum opens 2007/08* Local history resources from the Central Rappahannock Regional Library web site* Fredericksburg.com, the website of the Free Lance-Star newspaper* George Washingtons Fredericksburg Foundation (administering Kenmore and Ferry Farm)* Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park* Belmont, the Gari Melchers Estate and Memorial Gallery* (Virgnia)da:Fredericksburg(Virginia)(Virginia)(Virginie)( )()Vijini(Virginia)()(Virginia)(Wirginia)(Virgnia)()Virginia(Virginia)Virginia(Virginia)()
91675
White_County,_Tennessee
White County is a county located in the state of Tennessee.  As of 2000, the population was 23,102.  Its seat is Sparta.HistoryOn September 11, 1806, an act of the General Assembly created White County out of Smith and Jackson counties, responding to a petition signed by 155 residents of the area. The countys original geographic area included all of what are now White and Warren Counties, as well as parts of modern Cannon, Coffee, DeKalb, Franklin, Grundy, Putnam, and Van Buren counties.(Brief History of White County, White County TNGenWeb Project website, accessed May 2, 2008)The origin of the countys name is in dispute. The county is officially held to be named for John White (17511846), a Revolutionary War soldier, surveyor, and frontiersman who was the first known white settler of the area. White had moved his family to the Mountains from Virginia in 1789.( However, some historians suggest the county was named for Revolutionary War General James White, the founder of Knoxville.(A temporary seat was established near Rock Island, now in Warren County. Three years later a permanent county seat was established on the banks of the River and named Sparta.In 1840, White County became a destination for people from all over the country when Christopher Haufmann erected a large hotel on Bon Air Mountain, part of the Plateau. The hotel was near some springs as well as being at a high altitude; both were thought to be health-bringing, and people came from far and wide for the cures advertised by the resort. During this time, the Supreme Court (including then-Judge Jackson) often met in Sparta, and the town was even considered by the Legislature as a potential site for the state capital, narrowly losing to Nashville.White County was the site of a very large saltpeter mining operation during the Civil War.  The Cave Hill Saltpeter Pits (No. 1 and No. 2), located on Cave Hill near the mouth of England Cove, were intensively mined and still contain numerous relics from that operation.  Saltpeter is the main ingredient of gunpowder and was obtained by leaching the earth from these caves.  (Thomas C. Barr, Jr., Caves of Tennessee, Bulletin 64 of the Tennessee Division of Geology, 1961, 568 pages.)The Civil War impacted White County heavily, even though no major battles were fought in the area. Being on the border between the largely pro-Union Tennessee and pro-Confederate Tennessee, the county was the scene of bloodshed from partisans (called bushwhackers) of both sides. One famous Confederate guerrilla was Ferguson, who caused much mayhem and destruction before he was arrested after the war on May 28, 1865. White County provided the Confederacy with 19 companies, and the Union Army with just one.Over the following decades, White County slowly rebuilt from the ashes of war. The county was connected to the outside world by railroad, mainly because of the booming mining industries being started on Bon Air Mountain. The mountain was rich in coal, and enterprising local businessmen were quick to realize the profit potential that represented. Several mining towns sprang up on the plateau part of the county, including Bon Air, Eastland, and Ravenscroft. The coal mining industry employed thousands of White County men for decades, but as the 20th century went on, the mines started to close and the people started to move away, and the industry had vanished by the time of War II.GeographyAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which   is land and  (0.74%) is water. Geographic features *Falls*River*Fork*Hill Lake*Plateau*Great Falls Dam*Rock Island State Park*Gulf*Sunset Rock*FallsBlue Spring CaveBlue Spring Cave, located five miles northeast of Sparta, is the longest mapped cave in Tennessee and the tenth longest cave in the United States, with 35.0015 miles of passages.  The footprints of extinct Pleistocene (Ice Age) jaguars were discovered in the cave in 1990 by Bill Walter.  (Larry E. Matthews and Bill Walter, Blue Spring Cave, Published by the National Speleological Society, 2010, 346 pages, ISBN 978-1-879961-36-4). Major highways *Highway 70*State Highway 26*State Highway 84*State Highway 111*State Highway 135*State Highway 136*State Highway 285*State Highway 289 Adjacent counties *Putnam County (North)*Cumberland County (East)*Van Buren County (South)*Warren County (Southwest)*DeKalb County (West)DemographicsImage:USA White County, Tennessee.csv age pyramid.svg|thumb|left|150px|Age pyramid White County(Based on 2000 census data)As of the census of 2000, there were 23,102 people, 9,229 households, and 6,774 families residing in the county.  The density was 61 people per square mile (24/km).  There were 10,191 housing units at an average density of 27 per square mile (10/km).  The racial makeup of the county was 96.63% White, 1.64% Black or African American, 0.20% Native American, 0.23% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.46% from other races, and 0.79% from two or more races.  1.03% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 9,229 households out of which 30.40% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.50% were married couples living together, 10.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.60% were non-families. 23.40% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 2.90.In the county, the population was spread out with 23.50% under the age of 18, 7.90% from 18 to 24, 27.90% from 25 to 44, 25.40% from 45 to 64, and 15.30% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 96.20 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.40 males.The median income for a household in the county was $29,383, and the median income for a family was $34,854. Males had a median income of $26,706 versus $20,346 for females. The capita income for the county was $14,791.  About 11.20% of families and 14.30% of the population were below the line, including 16.90% of those under age 18 and 13.90% of those age 65 or over. Cities and towns  Cities and towns *Doyle*Sparta Unincorporated communities *Bon Air*Cassville*DeRossett*Quebeck*Ravenscroft*Walling Education  Public schools *White County High School*White County Middle School*BonDeCroft Elementary School*Cassville Elementary School*Central View Elementary School*Doyle Elementary School*Findlay Elementary School*Northfield Elementary School*Woodland Park Elementary School Private schools *Heritage Christian Academy Notable residents  * Black Fox - Cherokee chief* Gibbs Dibrell - Confederate General 8th TN Cavalry; successor to Gen. Bedford Forrests Brigade; Escorted President Davis from Greensboro, NC to Washington, GA after the fall of Richmond* Ferguson - Confederate guerilla* Flatt - Bluegrass legend* Harper - womens basketball head coach at Carolina State and a graduate of White County High School* Martin - Bluegrass Legend; invented the eight string fiddle* Morrison - former world heavyweight boxing champion* Rowan - journalist, author, U.S. Ambassador to Finland* Weaver - Arizona man, born in White County* Webb - League Baseball record holder for most doubles in a seasonSee also*Register of Historic Places listings in White County, TennesseeReferencesBlue Spring Cave by Larry E. Matthews and Bill Walter, published February 2010 by the National Speleological Society, ISBN 978-1-879961-36-4 (Soft Cover) ISBN 978-1-879961-37-1 (Hard Cover), 340 pages.External links**Sparta-White County Chamber of Commerce*Tennessee Department of Transportation Map of White County*Genealogy site for White County(, )County (Tennessee)de White (Tennessee)de White (Tennessee), di White (Tennessee)Comitatus (Tennesia)County (Tennessee)County (Tennessee) County (Tennessee)White (Tennessee)de White (Tennessee)County, Tennessee(, )White, Tennessee()
91761
Claiborne_County,_Tennessee
Claiborne County is a county located in the state of Tennessee.  As of 2010, the population was 32,213.  Its seat is Tazewell.HistoryClaiborne County was established on October 29, 1801, created from Grainger and Hawkins counties and extended the southern boundary to Anderson County.   It was named for Virginia tidewater aristocrat C. C. Claiborne, one of the first judges of the Superior Court and one of the first representatives in Congress from Tennessee.The Four Seasons Hotel was built on the location of present day Lincoln Memorial University in 1892 by an English land company, the American Association Limited.  At the time, it was reported by its promotors to be the largest hotel in the United States.  The main building was four stories high with a lobby 75 feet square and a dining room 50 feet by 160 feet.  It was reported to contain 700 rooms.  Also included in the complex were a hospital, an inn, a sanitarium, and other smaller buildings.  The hotel was not a success and was demolished in 1895.  During its operation, the Four Seasons Hotel offered buggy rides to nearby English Cave, which had been improved with wooden stairways, walkways, and bridges.  The rotting remains of these wooden structures can still be seen in the cave.  (Larry E. Matthews,  Caves of Knoxville and the Great Smoky Mountains, 2008, Published by the National Speleological Society, ISBN 978-1-879961-30-2, Chapter 2 - English Cave, pages 3746GeographyAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which   is land and  (1.65%) is water.Adjacent counties*County, Kentucky (north)*County, Virginia (northeast)*Hancock County (east)*Grainger County (southeast)*Union County (southwest)*Campbell County (west)*County, Kentucky (northwest)National protected area*Gap National Historical Park (part)DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 29,862 people, 11,799 households, and 8,684 families residing in the county.  The density was 69 people per square mile (27/km).  There were 13,262 housing units at an average density of 30 per square mile (12/km).  The racial makeup of the county was 97.79% White, 0.75% Black or African American, 0.24% Native American, 0.28% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.19% from other races, and 0.74% from two or more races.  0.64% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.Claiborne County, Tennessee.csv age pyramid.svg|thumb|left|150px|Age pyramid Claiborne County(Based on 2000 census data)There were 11,799 households out of which 32.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.80% were married couples living together, 11.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.40% were non-families. 23.40% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.48 and the average family size was 2.91.In the county, the population was spread out with 23.60% under the age of 18, 8.90% from 18 to 24, 28.70% from 25 to 44, 25.40% from 45 to 64, and 13.40% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 93.30 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.40 males.The median income for a household in the county was $25,782, and the median income for a family was $31,234. Males had a median income of $26,280 versus $19,951 for females. The capita income for the county was $13,032.  About 18.40% of families and 22.60% of the population were below the line, including 27.70% of those under age 18 and 19.90% of those age 65 or over.Cities and towns*Arthur (unincorporated)*Clairfield (unincorporated)*Cumberland Gap*Eagan (unincorporated)*Harrogate*Hopewell (unincorporated)*Little Sycamore (unincorporated)*Lone Mountain (unincorporated)*New Tazewell*Pruden (unincorporated)*Shawanee (unincorporated)*Speedwell (unincorporated)*TazewellSee also*Register of Historic Places listings in Claiborne County, TennesseeReferences External links **Mountain top removal mining in Claiborne County(, )County (Tennessee)de Claiborne (Tennessee)de Claiborne (Tennessee), di Claiborne (Tennessee)Comitatus (Tennesia)County (Tennessee)County (Tennessee)County (Tennessee)Claiborne (Tennessee)de Claiborne (Tennessee)County, Tennessee(, )Claiborne, Tennessee()
92003
Linn_County,_Oregon
thumb|right|Sign welcoming visitors to the county.Linn County is a county located in the state of Oregon. It is named in honor of F. Linn, a Senator from Missouri who advocated the American occupation of the Country. By the 2010 US census the population of Linn county was 116,672 showing a 13.2% growth since the 2000 census.(http://2010.census.gov/2010census/data/) Albany has been the seat since 1851.EconomyPrincipal industries are wood products, agriculture, mining, and manufacturing. Linn Countys economy relies heavily on the lumber and wood products industry; in 1990, this industry accounted for 40% of the countys manufacturing jobs. The climate and soil conditions provide one of Oregons most diversified agriculture areas, allowing a wide variety of specialty crops such as common and perennial ryegrass. Linn County is also home to the only emery mine in the United States, and the production of manufactured and motor homes.GeographyAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which   is land and  (0.78%) is water.Oregons of population for the 2000 census is located in the county, southwest of Lyons at .(Population and population centers by state: 2000. U.S. Census Bureau.)Adjacent counties* County, Oregon - (north)* County, Oregon - (west)* County, Oregon - (south)* County, Oregon - (east)* County, Oregon - (east)* County, Oregon - (northwest)National protected area*National Forest (part)DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 103,069 people, 39,541 households, and 28,232 families residing in the county.  The density was 45 people per square mile (17/km).  There were 42,521 housing units at an average density of 19 per square mile (7/km).  The racial makeup of the county was 93.20% White, 0.32% Black or African American, 1.27% Native American, 0.78% Asian, 0.15% Pacific Islander, 1.80% from other races, and 2.49% from two or more races.  4.38% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 22.2% were of German, 13.0% American, 11.2% English and 8.6% Irish ancestry according to 2000.There were 39,541 households out of which 32.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.90% were married couples living together, 10.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.60% were non-families. 23.00% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.58 and the average family size was 3.01.In the county, the population was spread out with 26.00% under the age of 18, 8.40% from 18 to 24, 27.00% from 25 to 44, 24.10% from 45 to 64, and 14.50% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 97.50 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.00 males.The median income for a household in the county was $37,518, and the median income for a family was $44,188. Males had a median income of $35,586 versus $24,073 for females. The capita income for the county was $17,633.  About 8.90% of families and 11.40% of the population were below the line, including 14.80% of those under age 18 and 7.10% of those age 65 or over.Government and politicsHistoryOn December 28, 1847 the Provisional Legislature created Linn County from the southern portion of Champoeg (later Marion) County. The boundaries were altered in 1851 and 1854 with the creation of Lane and Wasco Counties. The county seat was originally located in Calapooia (later known as Brownsville), but in 1851 the Territorial Legislature passed an act establishing Albany as the county seat. A special election in 1856 reaffirmed Albany as the county seat.Natural historyA variety of flora and fauna occur in Linn County. Fauna include mammals, birds, amphibians and reptiles. Trees include a variety of oaks and conifers as well as other species such as sessilifolia.(Charles Vancouver Piper and Rolla Kent Beattie, Flora of the Northwest Coast) The Newt is a common amphibian occurring in the oak woodlands of the county.(C. Michael Hogan (2008) Rough-skinned Newt (Taricha granulosa), Globaltwitcher, ed. Nicklas Stromberg http://www.globaltwitcher.com/artspec_information.asp?thingid43182)CommunitiesIncorporated citiesUnincorporated communities and CDPsSee also*Register of Historic Places listings in Linn County, Oregon* USS Linn County (LST-900)ReferencesExternal links* (, )County (Oregon)de Linn (Oregn)de Linn (Oregon), di Linn (Oregon)Comitatus (Oregonia)County (Oregon)County (Oregon)()County (Oregon)County (Oregon)Linn (Oregon)de Linn (Oregon)County, Oregon(, )Linn, Oregon()
92594
Bakerloo_line
 DepotsStonebridge ParkLondon Road Queens ParkThe Bakerloo line is a line of the Underground, coloured brown on the map. It runs partly on the surface and partly at deep level, from and Castle in the south-east to Harrow & Wealdstone in the north-west of London. The line serves 25 stations, of which 15 are underground. Its name comes from the fact that its route serves Street and Waterloo.History:For a detailed history of the line, see Street and Waterloo Railway.The route had its origins in the failed projects of the pneumatic 1865 and Whitehall Railway and the 1882 Charing Cross and Waterloo Electric Railway.(An extended history of the Bakerloo line, TfL)Originally called the Baker Street & Waterloo Railway, the line was constructed by the Electric Railways Company of London (UERL) and opened between Street and Lambeth North (then called Kennington Road) on 10 March 1906.(Day, J.R.; Reed, J. (2001). The Story of Londons Underground. Harrow Weald: Capital Transport Publishing. ISBN 9781854142450) It was extended to Elephant & Castle five months later, on 5 August. The contraction of the name to Bakerloo rapidly caught on, and the official name was changed to match in July 1906.(When work on the line started in June 1898, it had been financed by the mining entrepreneur and company promoter Wright, who fell foul of the law over the financial proceedings involved and dramatically committed suicide at the Courts of Justice, after being convicted in 1904. As a result, work on the line was stopped for a few months and did not resume until Yerkes and UERL stepped in and took over the project.(By 1913, the line had been extended from its original northern terminus at Baker Street to the west with stations with the Central Railway at Marylebone and the Western Railway at Paddington, and a new station at Edgware Road.Watford branchBakerloo.JPG|thumb|The southbound Bakerloo line platform at PaddingtonIn 1915 the line was extended further to Queens Park, where it joined the DC lines of the and North Western Railway (LNWR) that ran alongside the LNWRs main line (now the Coast Main Line) as far as Watford Junction. Bakerloo services to Watford were reduced in the 1960s and withdrawn in 1982, with Stonebridge Park the new terminus.Services to Harrow & Wealdstone were gradually restored from 1984 and in 1989 the present all-day service was instituted. Bakerloo trains share the tracks with Overground DC Line services from Euston between Queens Park and Harrow & Wealdstone.Stanmore branchBy the mid-1930s, the line was suffering from congestion caused by the limited capacity of its tracks between Baker Street and Finchley Road stations. To relieve this pressure, the network-wide New Works Programme, 1935-1940 included the construction of new sections of tunnel between the Bakerloo lines platforms at Baker Street and Finchley Road and the replacement of three Metropolitan line stations (Lords, Marlborough Road and Swiss Cottage) between those points with two new Bakerloo stations (St. Johns Wood and Swiss Cottage). The Bakerloo line took over the Metropolitan lines service to Stanmore on 20 November 1939. The branch remained part of the Bakerloo line until 1 May 1979, when similar congestion problems for the Bakerloo line caused by two branches converging at Baker Street led to the opening of the line, initially created by connecting the Stanmore branch to new tunnels bored between Baker Street and Charing Cross.Camberwell extensionAn extension at the southern end of the line to Camberwell and Hill was proposed and approved in 1931 as part of the London Electric Metropolitan District and Central London Railway Companies (Works) Act, 1931.()() In April 1937, the estimated cost of the extension was 5,000,000 (approximately 0 today) and the Passenger Transport Board announced that, due to rising materials prices, the extension was postponed until the Boards finances improved.() Apart from the extension of the sidings south of Elephant & Castle no work on the extension took place before the Second World War, but the powers were renewed by the government in 1947 under the Special Enactments (Extension of Time) Act, 1940.() A projected extension as far as Camberwell was shown on a 1949 edition of the Underground map but no further work was done.() The train describers at Avenue station showed Camberwell as a destination until the 1990s.()Electricity supplyOne oddity is that almost from its opening until 1917, the Bakerloo operated with the polarity of the conductor rails reversed, the outside rail negative and the centre rail positive. This came about because the Bakerloo shared a power source with the District Railway. On the Bakerloo, the outside conductor rail tended to leak to the tunnel wall, whereas on the District Railway, the centre rail shared a similar problem. The solution was to reverse the polarity on the Bakerloo line, so that the negative rail leaked on both systems.() In 1917, the two lines were separated when the LNWR began its New Line service between Euston and Watford Junction, which the Bakerloo would share north of Queens Park. As a result, normal operation was restored.CentenaryThe line celebrated its centenary on 10 March 2006, when various events were organised on the line.()Future developmentsRe-extension to Watford JunctionOver the next few years the northern section of the line may again see changes following the decision in February 2006 to transfer responsibility for Euston-Watford suburban services (on the DC Line) from the for Transport (DfT) to for London (TfL). This was in conjunction with the reorganisation of a number of north London railways under Overground.()(Information on Bakerloo line re-extension to Watford Junction, Transport for London.)Under a former London Plan it was projected that by 2026 the Bakerloo Line would be re-extended from Harrow & Wealdstone to Watford Junction, restoring the pre-1982 service. The railway line from Queens Park to Watford Junction, currently served by London Overground, would then be served only by the Bakerloo Line.( The restoration of Bakerloo Line service to Watford Junction could coincide with the Rail Link reopening, which would reroute line trains from Watford to Watford Junction.Camberwell proposalsThe 1949 extension to Camberwell proposal was resurrected in 2006 when the then London Mayor, Livingstone, suggested that an extension was being considered within 20 years.()() However, there are no firm commitments to this extension and it is only at the proposal stage. TfLs Transport T2025 - Transport Vision for a growing world city investment programme identifies the ambition to separate the present line into two self-contained lines by 2025.(T2025: Transport vision for a growing world city) In this plan, trains on the Northern lines Charing Cross branch would terminate at Kennington, and it has been mooted that an extension of the line to the south east may be implemented, including to Camberwell. In this scenario, an extension to the Bakerloo line would therefore no longer be required. However, recent plans are instead to extend this Northern line branch towards Battersea via two new stations at Elms and Power Station, meaning that the Bakerloo would once more be looked to provide any extension to Camberwell.Extension to Lewisham and HayesIn its draft Kent Utilisation Strategy,(Kent Route Utilisation Strategy: Draft for Consultation, Network Rail (April 2009), para. 10.8.2, p. 172.) Rail mentions the possibility of extending the Bakerloo line from Elephant & Castle to station and then taking over the Hayes branch line. Network Rail states that this would free up four paths per hour into London and so increase capacity on the Tonbridge main line, which would also relieve the junctions around Lewisham station. However, it states that this would not be undertaken until after 2015.A study by Lewisham Council in September 2010 investigated possible extensions to Canary Wharf, Charlton, Peckham, Blackheath, Catford, Slade Green and Hayes.(http://www.lewisham.gov.uk/NR/rdonlyres/4430D371-4CE4-4264-8CC7-28075167B2B3/0/2a97d6d882c849089de021924d6faf5804AppendixBBakerlooLineSELondonextensionsreview.PDF) Rolling stock  Former rolling stock File:1938 501-at-Harlesden.jpg|thumb|A 1938 Bakerloo train at stationWhen opened in 1906, the Bakerloo line was operated by Gate Stock trains, built at Park, Manchester. To cope with the extension to Queens Park, 12 extra motor cars of the Underground 1914 Stock were ordered, ten from Brush of Loughborough and two from the Forge Company.To operate services north of Queens Park, 72 additional cars were built by the Metropolitan Carriage, Waggon and Finance Company of Birmingham. These trains, known as the Watford Joint Stock, were partly owned by the Underground and partly by the London and North Western Railway (later Midland and Scottish Railway (LMS)). They were initially painted in LNWR livery. They were not equipped with air-operated doors and proved slow and unreliable, so they were replaced by new trains of Standard Stock in 1930 (although a few were retained by the LMS). For some years in the 1930s Watford trains had a distinctive blue stripe at window level.In 1932, some carriages that had been built for the line by Cammell Laird in Nottingham in 1919 were transferred to the Bakerloo line. When built, these had been the first Tube trains to be have air-operated doors. These (and other trains) were later replaced by more trains of Standard Stock, in turn being replaced by 1938 stock and 1949 stock.Prior to the opening of the Jubilee line in 1979, the Bakerloo line was worked by both 1938 stock and 1972 stock. The 1972 stock was intended for the Jubilee line, so from 1979 the Bakerloo line (now minus the Stanmore branch) was again entirely operated by 1938 stock. From 1983 the 1938 stock began to be replaced by trains of 1959 stock, but this was a temporary measure until 1972 stock became available. The last 1938 stock train was withdrawn on 20 November 1985. From 1986, the 1959 stock was transferred to the Northern line.() Current trains The Bakerloo line is now operated entirely by Mark 2 1972 stock, displaced from the Jubilee line by 1983 stock. The stock is maintained at Stonebridge Park depot.All Bakerloo line trains are painted in the distinctive London Underground livery of red, white and blue and are the smaller size of the two sizes used on the network, since the line goes deep underground in small tunnels.In the early 2000s the interiors of these trains were deep-cleaned and the upholstery replaced using a blue moquette. The seating layouts are both longitudinal and transverse, with some cars having longitudinal seating only.Transport for London states that the line is to be fully upgraded, with completion in 2020, and this will include the introduction of new trains, new signalling and a new control centre. Journey times should be reduced by two minutes and overall line capacity increased by 57%.()Map Stations Note: For the former Stanmore branch of the Bakerloo line, see the line article. Former stationsWatford branchBetween 1917 and 1982, Bakerloo line trains continued along the DC line past Harrow & Wealdstone to Watford Junction. These stations continue to be served by London Overground. Proposals have surfaced to re-extend the Bakerloo line to Watford Junction and service the following stations: Stanmore branch The Stanmore branch was originally constructed by the Railway (now the Metropolitan line) and was designated as the Stanmore branch of the Bakerloo Line in 1939. It was transferred to the Jubilee line on 1 May 1979. It connected to the main Bakerloo Line at Baker Street.* Stanmore* Canons Park* Queensbury* Kingsbury* Wembley Park* Neasden* Dollis Hill* Willesden Green* Kilburn* West Hampstead* Finchley Road* Swiss Cottage* St. Johns Wood* Baker StreetDepotsThe Bakerloo line is currently served by three depots; a main depot at Stonebridge Park, opened on 9 April 1978 on the site of a former Rail power station which contains the fleets maintenance facilities, the original depot at London Road (between the Elephant and Castle and Lambeth North), and a small depot immediately north of Queens Park, built in 1915. The Queens Park depot is unique on the London Underground network in that trains in passenger service run through it.When Bakerloo line services ran to Watford, there was also an additional depot at Green; this depot closed in November 1985 following the withdrawal of services.See also* Green - architect of the Baker Street & Waterloo Railways early stations* Heaps - architect of the extension stations from Warwick Avenue to Kilburn ParkMaps*Harrow & Wealdstone - *Kenton - *South Kenton - *North Wembley - *Wembley Central - *Stonebridge Park - *Harlesden - *Willesden Junction - *Kensal Green - *Queens Park - *Kilburn Park - *Maida Vale - *Warwick Avenue - *London Paddington - *Edgware Road (Bakerloo line) - *Marylebone - *Baker Street - *Regents Park - *Oxford Circus - *Piccadilly Circus - *Charing Cross - *Embankment - *Waterloo - *Lambeth North - *Elephant & Castle - *Stonebridge Park Depot - *London Road Depot - *Queens Park Depot - ReferencesExternal links* * * * A reproduction of the Bakerloo line for the freeware simulator BVELineLine (linka metra v Londn)(Lein Underground Llundain)lineLineLineLinealinegan:linelineBakerlooLineja:no:Bakerloo-linjennn:Bakerloo-linjaLinelinelineLineLinelineth:zh:
93328
Chatham_County,_North_Carolina
Chatham County is a county located in the Piedmont area of the state of Carolina.  As of 2000, the population was 49,329.  Its seat is Pittsboro.HistorySome of the first settlers of what would become the county were English Quakers, who settled along the Haw and Rivers.() The county was formed in 1771 from Orange County. It was named, like Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania in 1758, for Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham, who served as British Prime Minister from 1766 to 1768 and opposed harsh colonial policies.In 1907, parts of Chatham County and Moore County were combined to form Lee County. The award-winning(http://www.unctv.org/bif/transcripts/1997/bif1211.html) PBS documentary Family Name(http://www.pbs.org/pov/pov1998/familyname/) notes Chatham County as the place the relationship between the African-American and European-American branches of the Alston family originated.(http://www.pbs.org/pov/pov1998/familyname/about/about2.html) Moses Horton, Historic Poet Laureate of Chatham County, (1797?-1883) lived most of his life in Chatham County and is among the few slaves to have published material while still a slave.(http://docsouth.unc.edu/fpn/hortonlife/bio.html)(http://www.learnnc.org/articles/horton0403-1http://www.chathamarts.org/horton/)Moncure once served as the western-most inland port in the state, linked all the way to the coast by steamships.(http://www.chathamnc.org/Index.aspx?page29)On March 25, 2010, the Chatham County Courthouse, built in 1881, caught fire while undergoing renovations. For more information, see North Carolina.Coal miningThe county is one of three counties that have known minable coal deposits in the state. The area along the Deep River, which forms the border of Chatham and Lee County and Randolph county was a major coal-producing area between the War and the Depression. It was called the River Coal Field. The communities of Carbonton and Cumnock (formerly called Egypt in Lee County) originated with development of the coal mining industry. Much of the coal mined in the field during the Civil War was used to fuel Confederate operations. A fatal mining disaster at the Glen mine in the 1920s, along with frequent flooding by the Deep River, sealed the fate of the mines; they were all closed by the 1940s. Recent attempts to tap the coal have proved failures; geologists say the coal is too highly faulted and the threat of explosive gases underground is too high. In addition, the high-sulfur coal cannot be economically used under environmental laws that have succeeded in reducing air pollution. Geologists once thought that natural gas and oil might also exist in the area where the coal mines were, but none that is economical enough to be pumped has yet been found. 96% of the coal mined in North Carolina comes from Chatham County, the other 3% comes from small quarries in Randolph and Lee counties.Agriculture and industryThe county was long dependent on agriculture as the basis of the economy. The areas relatively unfertile natural soil conditions (composed mostly of the hard red clay soil common to the Piedmont), did not support the cultivation of commodity cash crops such as tobacco; this was never important in the countys economy. The production of livestock has always been more important to the county, especially the breeding of cattle and poultry. The county once had a thriving dairy industry, but in recent years most farms have been sold and developed. The county is one of the state leaders in the poultry industry, being home to several large poultry-processing facilities. The poultry industry in the county is centered mainly around the western part of the county near City. Foods and Poultry are the largest poultry companies in the county. Forage crops such as hay are also grown in large quantities in the county.  Farm Stewardship Association has been housed in Chatham County along with many agriculture farmers. Industrial growth in the county has been focused around the City and Moncure areas of the county, with Moncure dominating. Companies in that area include, Energy, Weyerhauser, Honeywell, and ATC Panels.  Brick manufacturing, which makes use of the local red clay soil, has been an important economic factor in the Moncure area, with several brick plants operating there and in Brickhaven. 3M operates a greenstone mine south of Pittsboro along 15-501. Greenstone is processed to manufacture roofing-shingle granules. In 2007, residents opposed to industrialization successfully blocked a similar quarry from being developed in the western part of the county.The scenic rural environment has attracted many artists (Artists Guild), and arts-related tourism is a growing economic influence.Chatham County is the location of the Shakori Hills Grassroots Festival of Music and Dance. The four-day outdoor festival is held twice each year, in April and October. Artists who have performed at Shakori Hills include Loveless, Ralph Stanley, Masekela, Donna the Buffalo, Carolina Chocolate Drops, Avett Brothers and Jim Lauderdale. Shakori Hills is also the location of the Hoppin John Fiddlers Convention and Mountain Aid benefit concert.Law and governmentA five-member Board of Commissioners governs Chatham County. The commissioners are elected at large, but must reside within a particular district. The members of the Chatham County Board of Commissioners are elected for four-year terms, but the terms are staggered so that all five seats are not up for election at the same time. The November 2010 election cycle brought an historic change to the political landscape with the election of three republicans; Brian Bock, Walter Petty, and Pamela Stewart. Only one other republican (John Grimes)  has ever been elected in Chatham County since Reconstruction after the Civil War. Current Chatham County Board of Commissioners  * Brian Bock, Chairman (District 3) Term: 2010 - 2014* Walter Petty, Vice-Chairman (District 5) Term: 2010 -2014* Pamela Stewart, Commissioner (District 4) Term 2010 -2014* Allen Michael Mike Cross, Commissioner (District 2) Term: 2008-2012* Sally Kost, Commissioner (District 1) Term: 2008-2012Commissioners appoint a county manager who administers the day-to-day business of the county, including personnel and budget oversight. The Board of Commissioners also appoints the county attorney, clerk to the board of commissioners who is responsible for meeting agendas and minutes, and the tax administrator who manages all tax office functions, but they do not appoint other county staff positions.The Board of Commissioners does have general authority over county policies, but several other boards have authority over specific policy areas, such as the Board of Health, Board of Social Services, Board of Elections and Soil and Water Conservation District Board. The Board of Commissioners appoints all members of the Board of Health and makes some of the appointments to the Board of Social Services, but neither the Board of Elections nor the Soil and Water District Conservation Board have any commissioner appointments. Chatham County is a member of the regional J Council of Governments.A Chatham County native, Hackney, is currently (2010-2011 session) serving his 15th term in the N.C. House of Representatives. He has served as speaker pro tem, house majority leader and house Democratic leader and was elected speaker of the house in January 2007. He is consistently rated by his peers as one of the ten most effective legislators, according to the N.C. Center for Public Policy Research. He is president-elect of the National Conference of State Legislatures.TownshipsThe county is divided into 13 townships: Albright, Baldwin, Bear Creek, Cape Fear, Center, Gulf, Hadley, Haw River, Hickory Mountain, Matthews, New Hope, Oakland, and Williams.EducationChatham County contributes funds to, but does not govern, K-12 public education and the community college system. The Chatham County School System is governed by its own elected board. There are three public high schools: Northwood in Pittsboro, Jordan-Matthews in Siler City, and Chatham Central in Bear Creek. A new middle school is scheduled to be built off Andrews Store Road near the new Briar Chapel Community in northeast Chatham by November 2010. A new high school is scheduled to be built on Jack Bennett Road in northeast Chatham by August 2012.Chatham is home to two schools - Woods Charter School and Chatham Charter School. Woods Charter School is a grade K-12 public school. The school moved into a new fully equipped building on 160 Woodland Grove Lane outside Pittsboro in August 2008. Woods ranked top ten on SAT scores in North Carolina. Charter School is a grade K-8 public school. The school is located on 2200 Hamp Stone Road in Siler City, NC.Central Carolina Community College, which has two campuses in the county, is governed by its own appointed Board of Trustees. Generally, county resources provide only part of the total funding for K-12 and community colleges, but the county devotes a considerable amount of its resources to public education. In FY 2007-08, more than 39% of the countys tax dollars went to education.According to the N.C. Association of County Commissioners Annual Tax and Budget Survey for FY 2006-07, the county ranked 11th in the state in total spending per student and fifth in the percent of the current expense/general funds spent on schools per student. The county also was 14th in overall education resources per capita during FY 06-07.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 49,329 people, 19,741 households, and 13,858 families residing in the county.  The density was 72 people per square mile (28/km).  There were 21,358 housing units at an average density of 31 per square mile (12/km).  The racial makeup of the county was 74.94% White, 17.07% Black or African American, 0.41% Native American, 0.59% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 5.81% from other races, and 1.13% from two or more races.  9.62% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. The Hispanic population of Chatham County increased by 613 percent between 1990 and 2000. http://www.bizjournals.com/triangle/stories/2008/04/28/editorial1.htmlThere were 19,741 households out of which 28.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.30% were married couples living together, 10.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.80% were non-families. 24.50% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 2.91.In the county the population was spread out with 22.50% under the age of 18, 7.30% from 18 to 24, 30.40% from 25 to 44, 24.60% from 45 to 64, and 15.30% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 96.80 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.80 males.The median income for a household in the county was $42,851, and the median income for a family was $50,909. Males had a median income of $32,980 versus $26,044 for females. The capita income for the county was $23,355.  About 7.10% of families and 9.70% of the population were below the line, including 12.70% of those under age 18 and 12.00% of those age 65 or over.GeographyAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which  is land and  (3.69%) is water.The county lies totally within the Piedmont physiographic region. The topography of the county is generally gently rolling with several higher hills rising above the general terrain. One of these hills, Terrells Mountain, on the Orange County line is the transmitter site for several radio and tv stations for the Raleigh-Durham market, including WUNC-TV 4, WDCG(G105), WKSL (93.9 Kiss FM), and WUNC 91.5 FM (NC Public Radio).The county lies within the Fear River drainage basin. The Cape Fear River begins in the county near the community of Moncure, at the confluence of the River and the Deep River below Jordan Lake. Everett Jordan Lake, a major reservoir and flood-control lake, is located within the Hope River basin and lies mainly in eastern Chatham County. The lake is owned by the Army Corps of Engineers and is partially leased by the state of North Carolina as Jordan Lake State Recreation Area.GeologyThe county lies in the Piedmont area of central North Carolina. Much of the eastern part of the county lies within the Triassic Basin, a subregion of the Piedmont. Much of the bedrock in the county is volcanic in origin and formed during the Triassic period (hence the name). The Triassic origins have led to the formation of coal deposits in the southern part of the county. The Boren Clay Products Pit just north of Gulf in extreme southern Chatham County is a place where Triassic flora fossils persist http://carolinageologicalsociety.org/gb%201977.pdfhttp://paleodb.org/cgi-bin/bridge.pl?actiondisplayCollectionDetails&collection_no24499 The volcanic origins also led to the creation of high amounts of metamorphic-based rocks in the county. The county lies on the Slate Belt. Soils in the county are mostly clay based and have a deep red color, as do most soils in the Piedmont. Groundwater in the county is general full of minerals and tends to be hard if not softened. Mineral-based water was the attraction at Vernon Springs during the latter part of the 19th century and the early part of the 20th century. A resort spa was established at the mineral springs. Visitors would drink the water in the hopes of curing ailments and diseases. The resort closed in the early 20th century and is now gone. The springs are still there and are maintained by a local church.TransportationChatham County has managed to retain its rural character in part because it is not served by an Interstate Highway.  However, Chatham County plays an important role in regional transportation due to its close proximity to the geographic center of North Carolina and to major cities such as Raleigh, Durham and Greensboro.  Though driving is the dominant mode due to the countys rural nature, residents enjoy a number of transportation options.Highways*20px U.S. 64*25px U.S. 421*20px25px 20px U.S. 15-501-N.C. 87The main east-west artery serving Chatham County is U.S. 64, which provides access to Siler City and Pittsboro.  U.S. Routes 421 and 15-501 run in a north-south direction through the county; U.S. 421 serves Siler City and U.S. 15-501 serves Pittsboro. During the 1990s and early 2000s, the NCDOT invested more than one hundred million dollars upgrading U.S. 64, U.S. 421 and U.S. 15-501, which had previously been two-lane roads, to multi-lane highways. There is now a U.S. 64 bypass north of Pittsboro; a similar freeway diverts traffic on U.S. 421 east of Siler City.TransitChatham County is served by two public transit providers - Chatham Transit Network and Chapel Hill Transit.  Chatham Transit Network (CTN) is the Community Transportation Program for Chatham County, providing fixed route and human service transportation.  CTNs fixed route provides weekday service between Siler City, Pittsboro and Chapel Hill.  Similarly, CHTs new PX route, established as a demonstration route mid-2009, provides weekday fixed route service between Pittsboro and Chapel Hill.BicycleChatham County provides many scenic bike routes along the countys rural highways.  The Tobacco Trail also traverses the northeast corner of the county.AirportSiler City Municipal Airport (5w8) is located  southwest of downtown Siler City. This public access airport is home to several single and multiengine airplanes.RailThe county is served by both Southern Railway and Transportation. Norfolk Southern serves Siler City, Bonlee, Bear Creek, and Goldston as a part of a spur line that runs between Greensboro and Sanford. CSX serves the Moncure area on trackage that runs between Raleigh and Hamlet. Oddly enough Pittsboro was once served by the System Railroad (the predecessor to CSX), but the tracks were taken up in the 1970s and were never to return.Parks and RecreationIn addition to those mentioned below, the communities of Pittsboro, Siler City, and Goldston operate parks and other recreation facilities.County Parks and Recreation AreasDistrict Park, District Park, Community Park, Thompson Park, Tobacco Trail, Beach Canoe AccessState Parks and Recreation AreasLake State Recreation Area including Crosswinds Campground, Ebenezer Church, Parkers Creek, Poplar Point, Seaforth, Vista Point, Robeson Creek, New Hope Overlook, and White Oak Recreation Areas, Haw State Natural Area, Lake Educational State ForestOther AttractionsPreservation Trust, Hope Valley Railway, Pines Nature Preserve, Nature Preserve, Landing, Grange Riparian Reserve, Mill Bend, River Park, MarinaGeographyAdjacent counties*County, North Carolina - north*County, North Carolina - northeast*County, North Carolina - east*County, North Carolina - southeast*County, North Carolina - south*County, North Carolina - southwest*County, North Carolina - west*County, North Carolina - northwestCities and towns thumb|300px|Map of Chatham County, North Carolina With Municipal and Township Labels *Fearrington*Goldston*Pittsboro*Siler CityUnincorporated communities:*Bear Creek*Bennett*Bonlee*Brickhaven*Bynum*Carbonton*Corinth*Crutchfield Crossroads*Gulf*Haywood*Moncure*Silk Hope*WilsonvilleSee also*Register of Historic Places listings in Chatham County, North CarolinaReferencesExternal links*Chatham County Government*Chatham Economic Development Corporation*Chatham County Travel and Tourism*Chatham Journal Newspaper*Chatham Conservative Voice*Chatham Online Bulletin Board*Chatham Chatlist Highlights*Interesting Facts & Tidbits About Chatham County*99 things we love about Chatham County  (,  )County (North Carolina)de Chatham (Carolina del Norte)de Chatham (Caroline du Nord),  di Chatham (Carolina del Nord)County (North Carolina)County (Nord-Carolina)County (Noord-Carolina)de Chatham (Carolina do Norte)County (North Carolina)County, North CarolinaCounty, North Carolina(,  )Chatham, Bc Carolina()
93601
Lander_County,_Nevada
Lander County is a county located in the state of Nevada.  As of the 2000 census, the population was 5,794.  Its seat is Battle Mountain.HistoryLander County was one of the original nine counties created in 1861. Named for W. Lander; chief engineer of a federal wagon route through the area in 1857. He later served as Special Indian Agent in the area, and died during the Civil War in Virginia in 1862 at the rank of brigadier general. Created in 1861, Lander County sprang forth as the result of a mining boom on the River, along the old pony express line; taking a considerable portion of Churchill and Humboldt counties with it. Eventually, Lander County would be known as the mother of counties since three other counties in Nevada were formed from it: Elko, White Pine, and Eureka. Its first county seat was Jacobsville in 1862 which was soon after moved to Austin in 1863 and finally Mountain in 1979.GeographyAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which  is land and  (0.47%) is water.Adjacent counties* County, Nevada - north* County, Nevada - east* County, Nevada - south* County, Nevada - west* County, Nevada - west* County, Nevada - northwestNational area* National Forest (part)DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 5,794 people, 2,093 households, and 1,523 families residing in the county.  The density was 1 people per square mile (0/km).  There were 2,780 housing units at an average density of 0 per square mile (0/km).  The racial makeup of the county was 84.41% White, 0.21% Black or African American, 3.99% Native American, 0.35% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 8.66% from other races, and 2.35% from two or more races.  18.52% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 2,093 households out of which 39.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.70% were married couples living together, 8.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.20% were non-families. 22.30% of all households were made up of individuals and 5.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.73 and the average family size was 3.23.In the county the population was spread out with 32.20% under the age of 18, 6.80% from 18 to 24, 29.00% from 25 to 44, 25.00% from 45 to 64, and 7.00% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females there were 105.50 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 105.50 males.The median income for a household in the county was $46,067, and the median income for a family was $51,538. Males had a median income of $45,375 versus $22,197 for females. The capita income for the county was $16,998.  About 8.60% of families and 12.50% of the population were below the line, including 13.50% of those under age 18 and 12.90% of those age 65 or over. Unincorporated communities *Austin 2004 population 340.*Battle Mountain 2006 population 3,779.*Galena Population 10.*Kingston 2005 population 288.*Pittsburg*RixieSee also* National Register of Historic Places listings in Lander County, NevadaReferences(Further reading*Theodore, T.G. and G.M. Jones. (1992). Geochemistry and geology of gold in jasperoid, Elephant Head area, Lander County, Nevada Geological Survey Bulletin 2009. Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.              External links* Lander County website* Battle Mountain Chamber of Commerce* Greater Austin Chamber of Commerce* Austin Branch Library* Battle Mountain Branch Library* Nevada Central Narrow Gauge  ()Countyde Landerde Lander, di LanderCountyCounty()CountyCountyLanderde Lander(, )County(, )Lander, Nevadazh:
94524
St._Louis_County,_Missouri
St. Louis County is a county located in the state of Missouri. Its seat is Clayton. St. Louis County is part of the St. Louis Metro Area wherein the independent City of St. Louis and its suburbs in St. Louis County, as well as the surrounding counties in both Missouri and Illinois all together account for a total population of over 2.8 million people. St. Louis County borders the City of St. Louis, which is independent from St. Louis County. Census 2010 put the county population at 998,954which is more than 3 times the size of its adjoining namesake city.()HistoryThe county was organized in 1812 and was originally a French colonial district (French Louisiana), named for the French King Louis IX, known as Saint Louis. Its original county seat was in various buildings including the Old Courthouse in downtown St. Louis by the Arch.In 1877, the City of St. Louis separated itself from the county, creating an city.  The city in August 1876 narrowly approved the separation while county residents overwhelmingly opposed the separation.  City residents had argued they wanted to be free of rid of county taxes and state influence over county government.  At the time the city had 350,000 residents while the rural county had 30,000.  The rural county also had only 150 miles of gravel roads.  The election was challenged in the courts and the they were formally separated in March 1877.()The countys former courthouse in St. Louis city became city property.  The new (and then much smaller county government met at the  Mount Olive Hotel, near todays Hanley Road and Olive Boulevard in what today is City, Missouri until deciding on a new location for the courthouse. The county considered locations for a new courthouse inMissouri (which claims to be the first planned suburb in St. Louis County and first suburb built west of the Mississippi River) and Missouri (then in an area  known as St. Ferdinand township).  A farmer named Ralph Clayton (who was 90 at the time) donated 100 acres in what would become Missouri for the site that was ultimately chosen in part because it was on the route of the Hodiamont  gauge street cars which stretched from Pine Lawn through Normandy and Kinloch to Florissant.()  Clayton said the site a half days ride from the city and more accessible than other villages in the county.() The first $38,000 courthouse in the newly defined county opened December 1878 west of Hanley Road and north of Clayton Road.  A new courthouse was built in 1945 (it is todays County Police headquarters).  The original 1878 courthouse was torn down in 1971 to be replaced by county government plaza and modern six-story courthouse.(The county became larger than the city in the U.S. Census when it had 951,353 compared to the citys 750,026.  With the city dropping to its lowest population since the 19th century in the U.S. Census and the county also dropping in population for the first time in its history there has been talk of the two entities reuniting.(http://nextstl.com/urban-living/the-history-and-possibilities-of-a-st-louis-city-county-reunification)Law and governmentSt. Louis County was the first Missouri County to adopt a home-rule charter under the Missouri constitution, in 1950.  The current St. Louis County Charter was adopted by the voters on November 6, 1979.power of the county is vested in the executive, which is a full-time salaried position. The current county executive is Dooley, who was re-elected November 2, 2010. The county executives term is 4 years; he/she is elected by the general population of the county.Ordinances are passed by a county council. The council is made up of 7 members, each from a separate district within the county. Council member terms are 4 years, beginning on January 1 following the election. Elections are held in even-numbered years, with terms for even- and odd-numbered districts staggered.The countys library system is Louis County Library, which has 20 branches.Crime and safetyWhen compared to other large urban counties, St. Louis Countys crime rate per 100,000 residents is among the lowest in the nation. For example, there were just 30 homicides reported in 2003 out of a population of over 1 million people. There has been a 25% decrease in crime since 1991, and St. Louis County is now at its lowest level of crime since 1973.  The Louis County Police Department is the largest and primary law enforcement agency in St. Louis County.  The agency is currently led by Colonel Timothy E. Fitch, Chief of Police.It reported an average drop of 19% in crime for the first half of 2009 compared to the same time frame in 2008. Categories include: murder, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny, vehicle theft, and arson. Burglaries had the sharpest drop: down 35%, with arson down 33%, vehicle theft down 17%, robbery down 15%, and larceny down 15%. There were only two murders, compared to the six in 2008()PoliticsSt. Louis County is statistically much more moderate than its heavily Democratic neighbor, St. Louis city. However, it is considerably less conservative than the rural parts of the state. Along with the city of St. Louis, both St. Louis County and Jackson County, containing most of the population and area of Kansas City as well as most of its Missouri suburbs, were the only two urban counties in the state of Missouri to have a Democratic majority of votes in the 2004 presidential election.In the 2008 presidential primaries, 41% of Republicans in St. Louis County voted for John McCain with 37% voting for Romney.  For Democrats in St. Louis County 63% voted for Obama while 36% voted for Clinton.  In total 187,234 votes were cast for Democratic Party candidates and 95,437 votes were cast for the Republican Party candidates.In the 2008 presidential election 59.5% of ballots were in favor of the Democratic candidate Obama totaling 333,123 votes, while Republican candidate McCain took 39.6% with 221,705 votes.There are 796,979 registered voters.(Registered Voters in Missouri 2008)GeographyAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (3.03%) is water. St. Louis County is part of the St. Louis metropolitan area.I-55 goes through St. Louis County from mile 192.7 to mile 201.6National protected areas* Muddy National Fish and Wildlife Refuge (part, Boones Crossing Unit in Missouri)* S. Grant National Historic SiteNatural boundariesThe River forms the northern border with St. Charles County, exclusive of a few areas where the river has changed its course. The River forms most of its southern border with Jefferson County. To the east is the City of St. Louis and the River. The western boundary with Franklin County is the north-south line where the distance between the Meramec and Missouri Rivers is the shortest, bisecting the City of Pacific roughly 2 blocks east of Hwy OO/F (First street).TopographyThe foothills of the Ozark Mountains begin in southwestern St. Louis County, with most of the rest of the county being a fairly level plateau. This western part of the county is the least developed, due to rugged topography. Bluffs along the Mississippi in the south of the county rise about 200300 feet above the river. A major floodplain area is the Chesterfield Valley, in the western part of the county, along the Missouri River, formerly called Gumbo Flats after its rich, dark soil; it was submerged by at least ten feet of water during the Flood of 1993, but recent development there is protected by a higher levee. The Columbia Bottom is a floodplain in the northeast of the county at the confluence of the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers; this is a conservation area open to the public. The Missouri Bottom area between the two other floodplains is largely agricultural, but is being increasingly developed. The des Peres drains the interior of county before flowing underground into the City of St. Louis and then resurfacing to form the boundary between southern portions of St. Louis City and St. Louis County. Other streams include Coldwater Creek, Bonhomme Creek, and Creve Coeur Creek, flowing into the River; Keifer Creek and Grand Glaize Creek, flowing into the River; Deer Creek and Gravois Creek, flowing into the des Peres; and Maline Creek, flowing into the River.GeologyThe bedrock is mainly limestone and dolomite, and much of the county near the rivers is Karst terrain, with numerous caves, sinkholes, and springs. No igneous or rock is exposed on the surface. A major outcropping of the Peter Sandstone formation, a fine white sandstone used for making clear glass, is mined in the southwest corner of the county in Pacific. Brick clay mining was once a major industry in the county. The Charbonier Bluff along the Missouri River is an outcropping of coal, and was used a fueling station for steamboats. The St. Louis Anticline, an underground formation, has small petroleum deposits in north part of the county.Flora and faunaBefore European settlement, the area was prairie and open parklike forest, maintained by Native Americans via burning. Trees are mainly oak, maple, and hickory, similar to the forests of the Ozarks; common understory trees include redbud, serviceberry, and dogwood. Riparian areas are heavily forested with mainly sycamore. By the 1920s most of the timber in the county was harvested; since that time, large parks and undeveloped areas in the western and southern parts of the county have grown dense forest cover. Old pastures are usually colonized with Eastern red cedar. Most of the residential area of the county is planted with large native shade trees. In Autumn, the changing color of the trees is notable. St. Louis County has the most recorded native species of plants in the state, but this is probably due to the intensive botanical research done in the area. Most species here are typical of the Eastern Woodland; but some southern species are found in swampland, and typical northern species survive in sheltered hollows. Invasive species, most notably Honeysuckle, are common in some homesteads converted to parks; these are actively removed.Large mammals include growing populations of deer and coyotes, which are becoming increasingly urbanized. gray squirrel, rabbit, and other rodents are abundant, as well as opossum, beaver, muskrat, raccoon, and skunk. Large bird species include turkey, goose, duck, various raptors like the vulture and Hawk, as well as shorebirds, including the egret and blue heron. Winter populations of eagles are found by the River around the of Rocks Bridge. The county is on the Flyway, used by migrating birds, and has a large variety of small bird species, common to the eastern U.S. The tree sparrow, an introduced species, is limited in North America to the counties surrounding St. Louis.Frogs are commonly found in the springtime, especially after extensive wet periods. Common species include toad and species of chorus frogs, commonly called peepers that are found in nearly every pond. Some years have outbreaks of cicadas or ladybugs. Mosquitos and houseflies are common insect nuisances; because of this, windows are nearly universally fitted with screens, and screened-in porches are common in homes of the area. Populations of honeybees have sharply declined in recent years, and numerous species of pollinator insects have filled their ecological niche.ClimateSt. Louis County has a continental climate, and has neither large mountains nor large bodies of water to moderate its temperature. The area is affected by both cold Canadian Arctic air, and also hot, humid air from the of Mexico. The county has four distinct seasons. Spring is the wettest season and produces erratic severe weather ranging from tornadoes to storms. Summers are hot, and the humidity can make the index rise to temperatures above . Fall is mild with lower humidity and can produce intermittent bouts of heavy rainfall with the first snow flurries usually forming in late November. Winters are cool to cold with periodic snow and temperatures often below freezing. Winter storm systems, such as Clippers, can bring days of heavy rain, pellets, and snowfall.The average annual temperature for the years 19712000, recorded at LambertSt. Louis International Airport, is 56.3 F (13.5 C), and average precipitation is 36 inches (914 mm). The average high temperature in July is 88.4 F (32 C), and the average low temperature in January is 22.6 F (6 C), although these values are often exceeded.  Temperatures of  or below occur 3 days per year on average.(2001 ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI (STL).  Weather Explained, Volume 4.  2006.  Last accessed December 4, 2006.)  The highest temperature ever recorded in St. Louis was 115 F (46 C), on July 14, 1954, while the lowest temperature on record is 23 F (31 C), on January 29, 1873(Welcome to the Top 10.  NOAAs Weather Service Weather Forecast Office.  Last accessed December 4, 2006.)Winter is the driest season, averaging about 6 inches of total precipitation. Springtime (March through May), is typically the wettest season, with just under 10.5 inches. Dry spells of one or two weeks duration are common during the growing seasons.Thunderstorms can be expected on 40 to 50 days per year. A few of them will be severe with locally destructive winds and large hail, and occasionally accompanied by tornadoes.(http://www.crh.noaa.gov/lsx/climate/torcli/stlouis.php) A period of unseasonably warm weather late in Autumn known as summer is common &ndash; roses will still be in bloom as late as November or early December in some years.Other geographyThe largest natural lake in the state is Creve Coeur Lake which was originally an oxbow of the nearby Missouri River, and is now the centerpiece of a popular county park.Manchester Road (Route 100) follows an ancient path westward out of St. Louis, following the boundary between the Missouri and Meramec watersheds, and is one of only two ways to leave the county without crossing rivers (the other being State Highway T.)The Sinks is a karst area near Florissant, with numerous sinkholes.Adjacent counties*St. Charles County (north, northwest)*County, Illinois (northeast)*City of St. Louis (east)*Clair County, Illinois & County, Illinois (southeast)*Jefferson County (south)*Franklin County (southwest)Major freeways and highwaysDemographicsfootnoteIndependent City of Louis, Missouri seceded from the County in 1876.  Population of the City of St. Louis in 1880 was 350,518.()As of the census of 2010, there were 998,954 people. There were 404,765 households with 263,423 family households. The density was 1,966 people per square mile (773/km). There were 423,749 housing units at an average density of 834 per square mile (322/km). The racial makeup of the county was 70.3% White (68.9% Non-Hispanic White), 23.3% African American, 0.2% Native American, 3.5% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.9% from other races, and 1.9% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.5% of the population. ()There were 404,765 households out of which 31.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.00% were married couples living together, 12.70% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.00% were non-families. 28.00% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 3.05.In the county the population was spread out with 25.20% under the age of 18, 8.30% from 18 to 24, 29.00% from 25 to 44, 23.50% from 45 to 64, and 14.10% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 90.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.70 males.The median income for a household in the county was $50,532, and the median income for a family was $61,680. Males had a median income of $45,714 versus $30,278 for females. The capita income for the county was $27,595. About 5.00% of families and 6.90% of the population were below the line, including 9.30% of those under age 18 and 5.30% of those age 65 or over. St. Louis County is the most affluent county in the state of Missouri.EmploymentSt. Louis Countys rapid job growth in the past two decades has brought the Countys share of the State of Missouris jobs to 28 percent. St. Louis County emerged as the economic center of the St. Louis region in the 1980s with both the largest number of jobs and largest resident labor force in the region. Since then, the countys economy continued to thrive, with continued low unemployment rates. The county contains about one-fourth of all jobs in the State of Missouri and about half the jobs in the St. Louis Metro area.(U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics)Consistent with national trends, the county saw considerable job growth in the late 1990s followed by a period of job loss following the 2001 recession. Job growth resumed in 2004 and has continued at a modest pace, coupled with solid wage gains through the first quarter of 2006.(The countys employment base has become more diverse as manufacturing employment has been in a long-term decline since the 1980s, with job growth coming from a variety of service industries. The share of employment from manufacturing fell from 15 percent in 1995 to 11 percent in 2005. In contrast, several service industry groups, particularly education and health services, grew substantially.(The unemployment rate for St. Louis County was below that of the metropolitan area and even farther below the national rate throughout the 1990s. Since 2000, the countys employment rate has been more closely aligned with both metro area and national unemployment rates.(Population and residentsSt. Louis County is often divided into Mid, North, West and South sections. North County lies north of Interstate 70, West County lies west of Interstate 270, South County lies south of 44 and Mid County lies in the middle of the three main bordering highways (I-70, I-270 & I-44) and the St. Louis county-city line.West CountySome sections of West County are inhabited by pro athletes, professionals and new wealth, creating a large area of high-income residents. Communities include  Ballwin, Chesterfield, Clarkson Valley, Creve Coeur, Des Peres, Ellisville, Eureka,         Manchester, Town and Country, Twin Oaks, Valley Park, and Wildwood. West County is home to two major shopping centers: Mall and County Center.  Local school districts include the School District and School District along with numerous private schools. Leisure spots in West County include Country Club and Park, which is home to the Butterfly House.Mid CountyMid County is made up of the central and eastern portion of St. Louis county.  The bulk of Mid County lies just west of the City of St. Louis.  Municipalities include Clayton, Maplewood, Brentwood, Webster Groves, Kirkwood, Richmond Heights, Frontenac, Warson Woods, Ladue, Rock Hill, Olivette, University City, St. Ann, and Overland. With access to Interstate 70 and Interstate 44 to the north and south of Mid County, access to Interstate 270 and Interstate 170 on the west and east and Interstate 64 running through the middle of Mid County, the area is never far from highway transportation.  The closest major mall to Downtown St. Louis is the Louis Galleria located in Richmond Heights.  Other popular areas are The Loop on Delmar Blvd. in University City and Plaza in Maryland Heights.  Clayton is also known for its wide variety of local shops, boutiques and original restaurants.North CountyNorth County is home to Boeings Defense, Space & Security unit, Louis International Airport, and Electric Company. The population is one of the most diverse in St. Louis County. Public transportation has been beneficial to North County and was the first area of Metro St. Louis served by the metropolitan rail system, MetroLink.  North County boasts major malls including Jamestown Mall in Florissant  and Louis Mills in Hazelwood. Cities of North County also include Bellefontaine Neighbors, Bridgeton, Ferguson,  Jennings and Spanish Lake.  Residents of some communities, such as Bridgeton and Hazelwood, often distinguish themselves from locations further north by labeling their area as Northwest County.  North St. Louis County is not only diverse in racial makeup but also by socioeconomic means. There are numerous black and mixed raced villages located in North-Central county along the Natural Bridge Corridor east of Interstate 170 including Glen Echo Park, Bellerive, Bel-Ridge, Bel-Nor, and Pasadena Hills, second to Fields, Illinois as the most affluent majority black community north of the line. Some of the inner-ring suburbs located between Interstate 70 and Interstate 270 along the city-county line show past and current signs of flight.South CountyWhile largely populated, much of South County is unincorporated. It is the most homogeneous area within St. Louis county and major communities include Fenton, Lemay, Mehlville, Oakville, Affton, and Sunset Hills. The start of the Mountains and Ozark plateau begin in South St. Louis county and neighboring Jefferson County. Many communities have an abundance of gently rolling hills.Cities and towns:For a listing by population, see: Louis Metropolitan Statistical Area.St. Louis County has 91 municipalities and 9 unincorporated places:: unincorporated: Times Beach was disincorporated in 1985, Peerless Park was disincorporated in 1999, Carsonville disincorporatedUnincorporated St. Louis CountyIn St. Louis County, one-third of its population and land area is unincorporated making up . In these areas, St. Louis County provides local services, such as zoning, code enforcement and police to these residents who do not reside in one of the 91 St. Louis County municipalities. These municipal-like services are available to the 322,085 residents of the unincorporated areas of St. Louis County. These local services are delivered to several areas throughout the West, Central, North and South portions of the county.  The St. Louis County Trash Collection and Recycling program is one example of such a service.  This program split the unincorporated areas into 8 districts for trash collection and recycling service.  Prior to the program, citizens in unincorporated St. Louis County were responsible for contracting their own trash hauling providers.EducationUnified school districtsHigh schoolsIn addition to its public high schools, St. Louis has an abundance of private and parochial schools, including the largest number of Catholic affiliated secondary institutions in the continental U.S. This is partly due to St. Louiss status as an archdiocese and historically Catholic city.  Most of the prestigious private schools reside in West St. Louis County, one of the wealthiest areas in the region.Universities*University in St. Louis Danforth Campus (western 80 percent located within the county with the eastern portion in the of St. Louis)(Danforth Campus Map. Washington University in St. Louis. Retrieved on June 13, 2009.)(Neighborhood Wydown / Skinker. City of St. Louis. Retrieved on June 13, 2009.)(Neighborhood Skinker / DeBaliviere. City of St. Louis. Retrieved on June 13, 2009.)*Louis University*of Missouri-St. Louis*University - Groves*University*Baptist University*UniversityHealth careIn 1927 a one million dollar bond was issued allocating funds for the construction of the first St. Louis County Hospital.(History of St. Louis County Hospital. Saint Louis County Health. Retrieved on August 24, 2009.) Construction of the 200-bed, non-segregated hospital began in 1929 in the city of Clayton. The hospital opened in July 1931 and ran until June 1986.(History of St. Louis County Hospital. Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. Retrieved on August 24, 2009.)Current list of hospitals in St. Louis County:County parksUndeveloped county parks*Bright-Fowler*Castlewood*Fairmont*Staley*Grasso*Parks South*Log Cabin*Meramec River*Union Road*Park*Stanislaus*TrailsEconomySt. Louis County is the largest county in Missouri with an employment contribution of nearly half of the metropolitan areas jobs and a quarter of the entire states. Additionally, St. Louis County boasts the highest per capita personal income of any other county in Missouri - $49,727. In addition to the 13 Fortune 1000 companies that call St. Louis County home, it has set itself apart as the entrepreneurial hub of the state with more companies formed here than anywhere else statewide.Many large enterprises from a variety of industry sectors have their worldwide headquarters in St. Louis County. Pizza and Save-A-Lot have headquarters in areas in the county.(Contact Us. Imos Pizza. Retrieved on August 19, 2009.)(News & Media. Save-A-Lot. Retrieved on August 19, 2009.)Louis County Economic Council is the development arm of St. Louis County government, dedicated to increasing opportunities for its businesses and residents.Municipal fire departments*Berkeley - 36*Brentwood - 4*Clayton - 32*Crestwood*Des Peres - 28*Ferguson - 30*Frontenac - 29*Glendale - 14*Hazelwood - 41*Jennings - 42*Kirkwood - 15*Ladue - 39*Maplewood - 31*Olivette - 27*Pacific*Richmond Heights - 21*Rock Hill*Shrewsbury*University City - 26*Webster GrovesFire protection districts*Affton - 11*Black Jack - 37*Community - 38*Creve Coeur - 23*Eureka - 24*Fenton - 13*Florissant Valley - 40*Kinloch - 43*Lemay*Maryland Heights - 44*Mehlville - 17*Metro West - 33*Mid-County - 45*Moline*Monarch - 22*Normandy - 47*Pattonville Bridgeton Terrace - 48*Riverview -49*Robertson -50*Spanish Lake - 51*Valley Park*West County EMS - 35*West Overland - 52See also* of counties in Missouri* of county executives of St. Louis County, Missouri* census statistical areas* Register of Historic Places listings in St. Louis County, Missouri* Louis County Economic CouncilReferencesExternal links*St. Louis County profile*St. Louis County Government*St. Louis County Municipalities page*St. Louis climate, from the National Weather Service*St. Louis County Economic Council* Digitized 1930 Plat Book of St. Louis County from of Missouri Division of Special Collections, Archives, and Rare Books   (, )Louis County (Missouri)de San Luisde Saint Louis (Missouri) , di St. Louis (Missouri)Louis County (Missouri)Louis County (Missouri) Louis County (Missouri)de St. Louis (Missouri)(, )Louis County, Missouri(, )St. Louis, Missouri()
95092
Houghton_County,_Michigan
File:Copper-24624.jpg|thumb|Old specimen of copper from Houghton County. Houghton County hosted a major copper-mining industry in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.Houghton County is a county in the state of Michigan.  As of the 2010 census, the population was 36,628.(2010 US census, ) The seat is Houghton.Houghton County is part of the micropolitan area, which also includes Keweenaw County. Part of the county is sometimes locally called Island.The County was set off in 1843, organized in 1846 and reorganized in 1848. It is named for geologist Houghton.(Clarke Historical Library, Central Michigan University, Bibliography on Houghton County.)GeographyAccording to the 2000 census, the county has a total area of , of which  (or 67.38%) is land and  (or 32.62%) is water.()The Portage Lift Bridge crosses Portage Lake, connecting Hancock and Michigan, by crossing over Portage Lake, which is part of the river and canal system that crosses the entire peninsula. The Portage Lift Bridge is the worlds heaviest and widest double-decked vertical lift bridge. Its center span lifts to provide  of clearance for ships. Since rail traffic was discontinued in the Keweenaw, the lower deck is used to accommodate snowmobile traffic in the winter. This is the only land based link between the north and south section of the Keweenaw peninsula, and is crucial.(Virtual Keweenaw Peninsula.)HighwaysUS Highways* Michigan State Trunklines* * * * Federal Forest Highways* 25px Federal Forest Highway 16 (FFH-16)Adjacent counties*Keweenaw County (north)*Baraga County (east)*Iron County (south)*Ontonagon County (west)National areas* National Historical Park (part)* National Forest (part)DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 36,016 people, 13,793 households, and 8,137 families residing in the county. The density was 36 people per square mile (14/km). There were 17,748 housing units at an average density of 18 per square mile (7/km). The racial makeup of the county was 95.52% White, 0.94% Black or African American, 0.54% Native American, 1.79% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.17% from other races, and 1.02% from two or more races. 0.70% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 34.8% were of Finnish, 12.4% German, 6.8% English, 6.6% French and 5.7% Italian ancestry according to 2000. 94.0% spoke English and 3.1% Finnish as their first language.There were 13,793 households out of which 26.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.50% were married couples living together, 8.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41.00% were non-families. 32.60% of all households were made up of individuals and 13.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 3.04.In the county the population was spread out with 21.80% under the age of 18, 19.10% from 18 to 24, 22.60% from 25 to 44, 20.90% from 45 to 64, and 15.50% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females there were 113.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 115.60 males.The median income for a household in the county was $28,817, and the median income for a family was $38,635. Males had a median income of $30,200 versus $22,468 for females. The capita income for the county was $15,078. About 9.90% of families and 16.80% of the population were below the line, including 16.10% of those under age 18 and 13.40% of those age 65 or over. Government The county government operates the jail, maintains rural roads, operates themajor local courts, keeps files of deeds and mortgages, maintains records, administershealth regulations, and participates with the state in the provision of welfare andother social services. The county board of commissioners controls thebudget but has only limited authority to make laws or ordinances. In Michigan, most localgovernment functions &mdash; police and fire, building and zoning, tax assessment, streetmaintenance, etc. &mdash; are the responsibility of individual cities and townships.The County Courthouse ..stood high upon the bluff on Houghton Village facing North and pleasantly overlooking Portage Lake. (Sawyer 110), and has been inducted in the U.S. Registry of Historic Districts and Buildings of the Peninsula.  Construction began in spring 1886. The building had its first addition to the north wing, the addition of a larger jail wing, in 1910, and that was the only renovation until the jail wing was condemned in 1961. A new jail was built in its present location, adjacent to the original. According to the Mining Gazette of July 25, 1886, The materials used with the exception of the facing brick are the product of the Upper Peninsula(p.3). Kathryn Eckert, in her Buildings of Michigan, wrote::The courthouse is composed of the original structure, a rectangular block from which project central pavilions with parapeted dormers, a four-story tower, and north and west wing additions. The curbed mansard roof, the grouping of windows beneath red sandstone lintels connected by bands that encircle the structure, and the decorative entablature unite the composition. Porches supported with posts and Gothic-arch bracketsThe interior is richly finished with wood; red, rich brown, and light yellowish brown floor tiles; ornamental plaster; and oak staircase; and stone fireplaces. (p. 464)The building section that was once the jail wing now house offices for various government offices such as the clerk of court.  Houghton County elected officials * Prosecuting Attorney: Fraser Strome* Sheriff: Brian J. McLean* Clerk/of Deeds: Mary Schoos* County Treasurer: Kathleen Beattie* Commissioner: John Pekkala* Mine Inspector: Murray Gillis(information as of September 2005) Cities, villages, and townships Cities*Hancock*HoughtonVillages*Calumet*Copper City*Lake Linden*Laurium*South RangeUnincorporated communities*Atlantic Mine*Dakota Heights*Dodgeville*Donken*Dollar Bay*Dreamland*Franklin Mine*Hubbell*Hurontown*Jacobsville*Mason*Ripley*SenterTownships*Adams Township*Calumet Township*Chassell Township*Duncan Township*Elm River Township*Franklin Township*Hancock Township*Laird Township*Osceola Township*Portage Township*Quincy Township*Schoolcraft Township*Stanton Township*Torch Lake TownshipSee also*Register of Historic Places listings in Houghton County, MichiganReferences(External links*HoughtonCounty.net*Hunts Guide to the Upper Peninsula: Houghton *Houghton County Sheriffs Office *township locator map* Clarke Historical Library, Central Michigan University, Bibliography on Houghton County.(, )Countyde Houghtonde Houghton, di HoughtonComitatusCountyCountyCountyde Houghton (Michigan)County(, )Houghton, Michigan()
95548
Muhlenberg_County,_Kentucky
Muhlenberg County is a county located in the state of Kentucky.  As of 2000, the population was 31,839. The county is named for Muhlenberg.  Its county seat is Greenville.The Central City Statistical Area includes all of Muhlenberg County.  Central City is the largest city in the county with a 2000 Census of 5,893 residents. Geography Muhlenberg County is part of the Coal Fields region of Kentucky. According to the 2000 census, the county has a total area of , of which  (or 99.02%) is land and  (or 0.98%) is water.() Geographic features The two primary geographic features of Muhlenberg County are the Green River and Malone.  The northern portion of the county is typically gently rolling hills, river flatlands, and some sizeable cypress swamps along Cypress Creek and its tributaries.  The southern portion consist of rolling hills with higher relief.  Many of the valleys in the southern part of the county are rather deep and in places, rather rugged.  This area is also known for many sandstone formations and some small limestone caves, of which only two known limestone caves are thought to be in the county, both in the far southern region.  A number of faults cross the county at roughly the half-way point between neighboring counties to the north and south.  Coal has been, and continues to be, a large natural resource found in the central portion of the county.  Most deposits reside deep underground where in the past, the deposits were closer to the surface.  In the recent past, it was common to see machines such as the Big Brother Power Shovel (pictured on the right) throughout the county.  During the 70s and early 80s, Muhlenberg County was the state leader in Coal Production and in some cases, the top producer of coal in the United States.Muhlenberg Countys predominate rock type is sandstone.  As one travels south and gets closer to the southern border, one begins to notice limestone outcroppings become more numerous and much closer to the surface.  Early attempts at extracting ore were tried at Old Airdrie on the banks of the Green River and at Buckner Furnace south of Kentucky.  Both operations were in operation in the late 19th century and early 20th century.  Neither of which were successful in the long run. Green River The  long Green River is a tributary of the River. It provides a commercial outlet for goods (primarily coal) to be shipped from the county to the major trade centers along the River. Muhlenberg County and the Green River first entered the popular conscience due to the Prine song Paradise, which was popularized by Denver, about a now-defunct coal-mining town in Muhlenberg County.While John Denver may have aided in the popularity, the song gained most of its popularity from loyal Prine fans in the midwest. Lake Malone Spanning  near the small town of Dunmor in southern Muhlenberg County, Lake Malone provides a locale for water recreation such as swimming, boating, and fishing. Lake Malone and the surrounding hardwood forest form Malone State Park.  Lake Malone is maintained by the Kentucky Department of Fish and Wildlife.  The lakes surface extends into two neighboring counties.  The lake is known for its sandstone cliffs and natural sandstone formations along the lake shore including a natural bridge.  The bridge itself is not in the boundaries of the state park.Adjacent counties*McLean County  (north)*Ohio County  (northeast)*Butler County  (east)*Logan County  (southeast)*Todd County  (south)*Christian County  (southwest)*Hopkins County  (west) Demographics As of the census of 2000, there were 31,839 people, 12,357 households, and 9,057 families residing in the county.  The density was .  There were 13,675 housing units at an average density of .  The racial makeup of the county was 94.19% White, 4.65% Black or African American, 0.13% Native American, 0.13% Asian, 0.19% from other races, and 0.72% from two or more races.  0.73% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 12,357 households out of which 30.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.70% were married couples living together, 10.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.70% were non-families. 24.30% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 2.90.In the county the population was spread out with 22.60% under the age of 18, 9.20% from 18 to 24, 28.00% from 25 to 44, 24.80% from 45 to 64, and 15.50% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 98.00 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.20 males.The median income for a household in the county was $28,566, and the median income for a family was $33,513. Males had a median income of $29,952 versus $18,485 for females. The capita income for the county was $14,798.  About 15.50% of families and 19.70% of the population were below the line, including 26.00% of those under age 18 and 17.00% of those age 65 or over. Cities and towns *Bremen*Central City*Drakesboro*Greenville*Powderly*South Carrollton*Graham Economy Muhlenberg County has been a major coal-producing region for the United States for many years.  In fact, during most of the 1970s Muhlenberg County annually produced more coal than anywhere else in the world.  It led the state of Kentucky in coal production throughout the 70s and even into the early 1980s before falling off at a rather dramatic clip later on.  Although the use of coal waned in the late 80s & early 1990s, as the 21st Century rolled around, the coal-mining industry in Muhlenberg and surrounding counties began to expand again and has once again provided a significant number of jobs in the region. One reason for this is the willingness of utility operators to install flue gas cleaning systems so that Coal can be burned much cleaner than in decades past.  Another reason is that coal from out west tends to burn cooler, thus causing a utility to have to buy larger quantities of western coal and mix (or Blend) it with other compounds or other types of coal.  This has proven to be an issue with many East Coast Utility Operators.  Muhlenberg County is the home of Kentuckys first commercial coal mine.  That mine, while not what one would think of today, opened in 1820 as the McLean Drift Bank.  It was located along the Green River in the former village of Paradise.   The mine and its impact on the community are referenced in the John Prine song Paradise. Other major employers in Muhlenberg County have supplemented the coal industry or expanded in other areas of expertise.  Those industrys include:*The Valley Authority Paradise Fossil Plant in Drakesboro*The Green River Correctional Complex in Central City*Nobel  in Graham*EBA&D in Graham*Muhlenberg Community Hospital in Greenville*Muhlenberg County Board of Education in Powderly*The Department of the Army, National Guard H. Ford Regional Training Center & Kentucky UTES*Armstrong Coal Company in Central City*Ken-American Resources: Paradise Underground Mine in Central City*Utilities Customer Service Center in Greenville*Utilities Green River Generating Station in Central City*Wal-Mart in Central City.  Wal-Mart operates a . full service Supercenter along 62.*Uncle Lees / Wing Supply in Greenville, Kentucky Chamber of commerce In January 2006, the chambers of commerce from Central City and Greenville merged to form the Greater Muhlenberg Chamber of Commerce. The new, unified chamber consists of over 155 local businesses.(Greater Muhlenberg Chamber of Commerce - Message from the President) Incoming industries Energys new Thoroughbred Energy Plant, a coal-burning power generation facility expected to bring 450 permanent jobs to the area, is to be located in Central City.(http://www.peabodyenergy.com/Operations/Thoroughbred.asp) The plant was projected to begin electricity generation sometime in 2007,(Kentucky Issues Air Permit for Peabodys Thoroughbred Energy Campus) but a dispute over Peabodys air quality permit has halted construction plans.( )  The power plant plans have now been scraped and instead, a new partnership between Energy and ConocoPhillips Oil Company called, Kentucky NewGas has been formed.  Kentucky NewGas is a state-of-the-art energy center that will transform Kentucky coal into clean natural gas, while creating 500 long-term jobs and $100 million in annual economic benefits.  The location of this new, large state-of-the-art facility is on the outskirts of Central City close to the Green River.  More information about the project can be found on their website: Kentucky NewGasOn April 25, 2006, frozen food company Express announced plans to locate a facility in Greenville. The company has renovated the facility vacated by food distribution company SuperValu in 2001, and is in the process of creating up to 200 permanent jobs.(Governor Ernie Fletcher Announces Gourmet Express to Locate in Greenville) Education  Schools Public schools in Muhlenberg County are under the purview of the Muhlenberg County Board of Education. They include: Elementary (K-5) *Elementary School in Bremen*City Elementary School in Central City*Greenville Elementary School in Greenville*Elementary School in Powderly*South Elementary School in Belton Middle (6-8) *North Middle School in Powderly*South Middle School in Greenville High (9-12) *County High School in Greenville Postsecondary The Muhlenberg Campus of Community College is located in Central City.The Career Development Center is located between Central City & Greenville. Libraries There are two public libraries in Muhlenberg County: Harbin Memorial Library in Greenville and Central City Library in Central City. Both locations provide residents with free access to high speed Internet service.These libraries have been joined together as Muhlenberg County Library, although both locations remain open. History There were once eight schools in Muhlenberg County, however in 1990, the school board consolidated the middle and high school students into two middle and two high schools. Bremen High School, Central City High School, Graham High School, and half of Muhlenberg Central High School became Muhlenberg North Middle School and Muhlenberg North High School, while the other half of Muhlenberg Central High School, Drakesboro High School, Hughes-Kirkpatrick High School, Greenville High School, and Lake Malone School (which housed some middle school students) became Muhlenberg South Middle School and Muhlenberg South High School. The eight distinct schools continued to house elementary school students.In 2004, the school board began consolidating the badly deteriorating elementary schools, closing Graham Elementary School and transferring students to Longest Elementary School and the expanded Greenville Elementary School, and closing Malone School transferring those students to Hughes-Kirkpatrick Elementary School. Consolidation continued in 2005 with the closure of Drakesboro Elementary School. Students from Drakesboro spent a year at Hughes-Kirkpatrick Elementary School until the opening of the newly constructed Muhlenberg South Elementary School in 2006 (and subsequent closing of Hughes-Kirkpatrick.)On February 5, 2008, three communities in Muhlenberg County received major damage during the Super Tuesday tornado outbreak. These communities were Greenville, Powderly, and Central City. Three residents were killed outside Greenville when the EF-3 tornado struck.In November 2008 the Muhlenberg County school board announced that both Muhlenberg South High School and Muhlenberg North High School will combine and no longer be the Suns and Stars but will be Muhlenberg County High School home of the Mustangs. The change took effect in June 2009. Media *WMTA AM 1380 Radio established in 1955, Central City*WNES AM 1050 Radio established in 1955, Central City*Times Argus established in 1909, Central City*Leader-News established in Greenville now located in Central City*WKYA FM 105.5 radio station in Greenville*WQXQ FM 101.9 100,000 watts studios in Central City with tower and transmitter at Ridge, Kentucky in Ohio County Sites and events of interest *Malone State Park in Dunmor*Muhlenberg County Rail to Trails,  converted railroad track running between Central City and Greenville*Motorsports shop in Central City*Duncan Center Museum & Art Gallery in Greenville*Four Legends Fountain in Drakesboro*Day Cruise-In in Central City*Muhlenberg County Agriculture and Convention Center in Powderly*Paradise Park in Powderly, includes:**Coal Mines Shotgun House**Travis Birthplace**Paradise Park Museum**Springridge School*Valley Authority Paradise Fossil Plant in Drakesboro, one of the largest Coal-Fired Power Plants in the United States.  Site includes:**Public Boat Launch Ramp along the Green River**Public Fishing Lakes**Historic Village of Paradise Cemetery, the only remnant of the village along the Green River. Notable natives *Best (Rosco P. Coltrane of the of Hazzard) was born in Powderly.*Everly of the Everly Brothers was born in the now-defunct community of Brownie, near Central City.*Kennedy Jones, guitarist*Oates, actor, was born in Depoy near Greenville*Travis, legendary country and western musician was born in Rosewood, KentuckySee also*Register of Historic Places listings in Muhlenberg County, KentuckyReferencesExternal links*Muhlenberg County Schools*Greater Muhlenberg Chamber of Commerce*http://www.flickr.com/photos/perspectivephotography/sets/72157603878143830/ Photos of the damage path caused by the Super Tuesday tornado outbreak (, )Countyde Muhlenbergde Muhlenberg, di MuhlenbergCountyCounty Countyde Muhlenberg(, )County(, )Muhlenberg, Kentucky()
95913
Coltan
Coltan is the industrial name for columbite&ndash;tantalite, a dull black metallic mineral from which the elements niobium (formerly columbium) and tantalum are extracted. The niobium-dominant mineral is columbite, hence the col half of the term.  The mineral concentrates dominated by tantalum are referred to as tantalite.()  Tantalum from coltan is used to manufacture electronic capacitors, used in consumer electronics products such as cell phones, players, game systems and computers.  Coltan mining has been cited ()() as helping to finance serious conflict, for example  in the Congo()().Production and supplyApproximately 71% of global tantalum supply in 2008 was met by newly mined product, 20% from recycling, and the remainder from tin slag and inventory.  ()Tantalum minerals are mined in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Republic of Congo, China, Ethiopia, and Mozambique.() Tantalum is also produced in Thailand and Malaysia as a by-product of tin mining and smelting.Potential future mines, in descending order of magnitude, are being explored in Arabia, Egypt, Greenland, China, Mozambique, Canada, Australia, the States, Finland, Afghanistan,(http://www.globalresearch.ca/index.php?contextva&aid12486)and Brazil.()A significant reserve of coltan was discovered in 2009 in western Venezuela.(http://www.venezuelanalysis.com/news/4869, October 16th, 2009) In 2009 the Colombian government announced coltan reserves had been found in Colombias eastern provinces.(http://www.semana.com/noticias-nacion/guerra-coltan/131652.aspx, November 21st, 2009)Image:global-mined-tantalum-production-1990-2009.png|thumb|center|888px|altPlot of global mined tantalum production, 19902009, for World, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Democratic Republic of Congo, and the rest of Africa.|Data sources:(1990-1993: U.S. Geological Survey, 1994 Minerals Yearbook (MYB), COLUMBIUM (NIOBIUM) AND TANTALUM By Larry D. Cunningham, Table 10; 1994-1997: MYB 1998 Table 10; 1998-2001: MYB 2002 p. 21.13; 2002-2003: MYB 2004 p. 20.13; 2004: MYB 2008 p. 52.12; 2005-2009: MYB 2009 p. 52.13.  USGS did not report data for other countries (China, Kazakhstan, Russia, etc.) owing to data uncertainties..)Use and demandColtan is used primarily for the production of capacitors, used in many electronic devices.It is also used in high temperature alloys for air and land based turbines.() The upsurge in electronic products over the past decade resulted in a peak in late 2000, lasting a few months.  In 2005 the price was still down at early 2000 levels.()()The United States Geological Survey estimates that tantalum production capacity could meet global demand, which is growing at four percent annually, up until the year 2013.(Ethics of Coltan mining in the Democratic Republic of CongoConflicts, including the Rwandan occupation in the east of the Republic of Congo (DRC) made it difficult for the DRC to exploit its coltan reserves. Mining of the mineral is mainly artisanal and small-scale. A 2003 Security Council report() charged that a great deal of the ore is mined illegally and smuggled over the countrys eastern borders by militias from neighbouring Uganda, Burundi and Rwanda.() Coltan smuggling likely provides income for the military occupation of Congo, as well as prolonged civil conflict, according to an  activist website, Freedom.(Playstation 2 component incites African war, Console war reaches past the couch and into the Congo, By Ben Silverman, Yahoo Games, 7/25/08.)To many, this raises ethical questions akin to those of diamonds. Owing to the difficulty of distinguishing legitimate from illegitimate mining operations, several electronics manufacturers have decided to forgo central African coltan altogether, relying on other sources. Toward Freedom claims that the 2000 launch of the Sony 2 increased demand for tantalum electrolytic capacitors, causing the world price of coltan to increase sharply, in turn resulting in accelerated mining of the Congolese hills containing coltan. Sony claims it has discontinued its use of tantalum acquired from the Congo, sourcing it from other countries. However, Towards Freedom claims that some of it must have come from the Congo.(All three countries named by the Nations as smugglers of coltan have denied being involved. Austrian journalist Werner has documented links between multi-national companies like Bayer and the illegal coltan traffic.(Werner, Klaus, 2003,The New Black Book of Brand Companies (in German Das neue Schwarzbuch Markenfirmen), ISBN 3-216-30715-8) A United Nations committee investigating the plunder of gems and minerals in the Congo listed in its final report( approximately 125 companies and individuals involved in business activities breaching international norms. Companies accused of irresponsible corporate behavior are for example the Corporation,() Wings Resources International() Forrest Group() and Group.()Much coltan from the DRC is being exported to China for processing into electronic-grade tantalum powder and wires.(Tiffany Ma, China and Congos Coltan Connection, Project 2049 Futuregram (09-003), June 22, 2009, at http://project2049.net/documents/china_and_congos_coltan_connection.pdf)Estimates of the Congos fraction of the worlds coltan reserves range from 64%(The Democratic Republic of the Congo: Major Challenges Impede Efforts to Achieve U.S. Policy Objectives; Systematic Assessment of Progress Is Needed GAO-08-562T, March 6, 2008 http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08562t.pdf -- on request for their source the GAO gave the Golbal Witness report Under-Mining Peace: Tin - the Explosive Trade in Cassiterite in Eastern DRC  June 30, 2005 http://www.globalwitness.org/media_library_detail.php/138/en/) to 80%.(Congos coltan rush 1 August 2001 http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/1468772.stm) Tantalum, the primary mineral extracted from Coltan is also mined from other sources, and Congolese coltan represented around 10% of world production in recent years.(http://tanb.org/coltan)(http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/niobium/myb1-2008-niobi.pdf)Environmental concernsBecause of uncontrolled mining, the land is eroding and polluting lakes and rivers, affecting the ecology of the region. The Eastern Gorillas population has diminished as well. Miners are far from food sources and have been hunting gorillas.() The gorilla population has been seriously reduced and is now critically endangered. In Central and West Africa an estimated 35 million tons of so-called bush meat is obtained by killing animals (including gorillas) each year.()Price increases and changing demandsThere has been a significant drop in the production and sale of coltan and niobium from African mines since the dramatic price spike in 2000, based on dot com speculation and multiple ordering. This is confirmed in part by figures from the States Geological Survey.(U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Summaries, January 2002, Tantalum p. 166-7)(U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Summaries, January 2005, Tantalum p. 166-7)The Tantalum-Niobium International Study Centre in Belgium, a country with traditionally close links to the Congo, has encouraged international buyers to avoid Congolese coltan on ethical grounds: The central African countries of Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda and their neighbours used to be the source of significant tonnages. But civil war, plundering of national parks and exporting of minerals, diamonds and other natural resources to provide funding of militias has caused the Tantalum-Niobium International Study Center to call on its members to take care in obtaining their raw materials from lawful sources. Harm, or the threat of harm, to local people, wildlife or the environment is unacceptable.()For economic rather than ethical reasons, a shift is also being seen from traditional sources such as Australia, towards new suppliers such as Egypt.() This may have been brought about by the bankruptcy of the worlds biggest supplier, Australias of Gwalia, although the company continues to produce and export ore.References External links * UN Coltan Explainer* High-Tech Genocide in Congo, by Keith Harmon Snow.* Issia, Cote dIvoire, Coltan Deposits* Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting  Congos Bloody Coltan (Video)* ABC Late Night Live interview with Michael Nest  Coltan (Audio)* Blood Coltan (Video)* Coltan, Gorillas and cellphones* Congos Tragedy: The War The World Forgot* Cellphones fuel Congo conflict* Human cost of mining in DR Congo* Our Cell Phones, Their War* Forced Child-Labor PlayStation Miners* Fairphone - Fairtrade Phone Project* Coltan: a new blood mineral* Conflict Minerals Company Rankings, technology company classification surveying their compromise to avoid the use of conflict minerals. Report from Hope for Congo information campaign, of Project.ar:bg:ca:Coltancs:Coltande:Coltanet:Koltanes:Coltaneo:Koltanoeu:Koltanfr:Coltangl:Coltanit:Columbite-tantalite()nl:Coltanja:pl:Koltanpt:Coltanru:-sl:Koltanfi:Koltaanisv:Coltanta:tr:Koltanzh:
96187
Perry_County,_Illinois
Perry County is a county located in the state of Illinois.  As of 2000, the population was 23,094.  Its seat is Pinckneyville, Illinois.GeographyPerry County is located in Southwestern Illinois.  Pinckneyville, at the center of the county, is approximately  southeast of St. Louis, Missouri and  southwest of Chicago.  The River lies about  west of the County.According to the 2000 census, the county has a total area of , of which  (or 98.69%) is land and  (or 1.31%) is water.()The Countys topography is mainly flat with some rolling hills.  The part of the Countys eastern border, the part shared with Franklin County, is formed by the Little Muddy River.  Creek runs north to south through the County and lies just east of Pinckneyville.The countys topography also features many strip cut lakes, lakes left behind following above-ground coal mining.  Lakes at two of the countys chief recreation areas, the Du Quoin State Fairgrounds and State Recreation Area, were formed this way.Major highwaysAdjacent counties*Washington County - north*Jefferson County - northeast*Franklin County - east*Jackson County - south*Randolph County - westHistoryPerry County was formed in 1827 out of Jackson and Randolph Counties. It was named in honor of Hazard Perry who defeated the British fleet at the decisive of Lake Erie in the of 1812.File:Perry County Illinois 1827.png|Perry County at the time of its creation in 1827In its early history, Perry County was mainly an inland pioneer outpost.  Early settlers, including some War veterans bearing land grants, moved here from the Eastern United States.  These were primarily Protestant settlers.  Growth boomed in the 1850s for two reasons:  construction of the Illinois Central Railroad through the eastern portion of the county, and the discovery of large coal reserves.  Immigrants from Ireland, Poland, Germany, Italy and elsewhere steadily increased the Countys population from 1850 through the 1920s.  African Americans also were established in the County during northward migration following the Civil War.Mining continued to be the dominant employment sector through the 1990s, when Air Act regulations devastated the Illinois coal economy.Demographics	As of the census of 2000, there were 23,094 people, 8,504 households, and 5,842 families residing in the county.  The density was 52 people per square mile (20/km).  There were 9,457 housing units at an average density of 21 per square mile (8/km).  The racial makeup of the county was 89.55% White, 8.02% Black or African American, 0.23% Native American, 0.28% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 1.09% from other races, and 0.79% from two or more races.  1.76% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 30.2% were of German, 17.8% American, 9.6% Irish, 9.0% English, 6.1% Italian, 5.5% Polish and 1.0% Dutch ancestry according to 2000. There were 8,504 households out of which 30.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.30% were married couples living together, 9.70% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.30% were non-families. 27.90% of all households were made up of individuals and 14.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 2.96.In the county the population was spread out with 22.00% under the age of 18, 10.30% from 18 to 24, 29.20% from 25 to 44, 22.50% from 45 to 64, and 16.00% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 113.10 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 114.80 males.The median income for a household in the county was $33,281, and the median income for a family was $41,064. Males had a median income of $29,169 versus $20,170 for females. The capita income for the county was $15,935.  About 10.10% of families and 13.20% of the population were below the line, including 16.50% of those under age 18 and 10.10% of those age 65 or over. Cities and towns *Cutler*Du Quoin*Pinckneyville*St. Johns*Tamaroa*Willisville*Dowell*Partial Desoto Census designated places *Conant*Swanwick*Winkle Climate and weather sourceThe Weather Channel()In recent years, average temperatures in the county seat of Pinckneyville have ranged from a low of  in January to a high of  in July, although a record low of  was recorded in January 1912 and a record high of  was recorded in July 1934.  Average monthly precipitation ranged from  in February to  in May.(See also*National Register of Historic Places listings in Perry CountyReferences(External links*Perry County, Illinois Government (, )County (Illinois)de Perry (Illinois)de Perry (Illinois), di Perry (Illinois)Comitatus (Illinoesia)County (Illinois)County (Illinois) County (Illinois)Perry (Illinois)de Perry (Illinois)County, Illinois(, )Perry, Illinois()
96698
Taylor_County,_Georgia
Taylor County is a county located in the state of Georgia.  As of 2000, the population was 8,815.  The 2007 Census Estimate shows a population of 8,738.(Census estimate)  The seat is Butler.HistoryTaylor County was created on January 15, 1852, by an act of the General Assembly from portions of Macon, Marion and Talbot counties.The County is named for Taylor, twelfth of the United States.The land for building the courthouse was purchased from Andrew McCants, John T. Gray, John Sturdivant, John L. Parker, and a Mr. Covington. (from a meeting minutes March 8, 1852)Militia districts in the county included Prattsburg 737, Hall 743, Reynolds 741, Butler 757, Cedar Creek 1071, and Whitewater 853.GeographyAccording to the 2000 census, the county has a total area of , of which  (or 99.43%) is land and  (or 0.57%) is water.()Taylor County is dissected by the Line geological formation. The upper half of the county is located in the Piedmont region and consists of gently rolling hills and clay-based soils. The lower half of the county is located in the Upper Coastal Plain and is markedly flatter and the soil more sandy. The Flint River marks the entirety of the countys northeastern border.The county is driven by a largely agricultural economy. Peaches, strawberries, pecans, peanuts, watermelons, and cotton are the most commonly raised crops. Lumbering is also important to the local economy. The county is heavily forested in most areas due in part to the many large plantation pine farms. There are also many desirable hardwood forests, especially along the Flint River basin and tributary streams. The southwestern portion of the county is covered with large sandhills that have given rise to several stable sand mining operations.The county supports a very healthy population of animals, including deer, Turkey, Cottontail, Raccoon, Coyote, Bobcat, Armadillo, Opossum, Hawk, and the federally endangered Florida Gopher Tortoise. Taylor County is home to five of North Americas snakes (Eastern Diamondback Rattlesnake, Timber Rattlesnake, Carolina Pigmy Rattlesnake, Eastern Coral Snake, Water Moccasin, and Copperhead), representing every North American family of venomous snake.The dominant tree species are Southern Red Oak, Post Oak, Longleaf Pine, Loblolly Pine, Sweetgum, and Red Maple. Taylor County contains the largest stands of Atlantic White Cedar in the state of Georgia. These stands can be found along much of Whitewater and Little Whitewater Creeks and are at the heart of a growing movement to conserve these unique plant communities for posterity.Major highways*20px Highway 19*20px Highway 80*20px State Route 90*20px State Route 96*20px State Route 128*20px Georgia State Route 137*20px State Route 208Adjacent counties*Upson County (north)*Crawford County (northeast)*Peach County (east)*Macon County (southeast)*Schley County (south)*Marion County (southwest)*Talbot County (northwest)DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 8,815 people, 3,281 households, and 2,283 families residing in the county.  The density was 23 people per square mile (9/km).  There were 3,978 housing units at an average density of 10 per square mile (4/km).  The racial makeup of the county was 55.39% White, 42.56% Black or African American, 0.11% Native American, 0.18% Asian, 0.93% from other races, and 0.82% from two or more races.  1.85% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 3,281 households out of which 30.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.50% were married couples living together, 20.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.40% were non-families. 27.60% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 3.12.In the county the population was spread out with 26.90% under the age of 18, 9.00% from 18 to 24, 28.10% from 25 to 44, 22.80% from 45 to 64, and 13.30% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 95.40 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.60 males.The median income for a household in the county was $25,148, and the median income for a family was $30,000. Males had a median income of $30,278 versus $20,241 for females. The capita income for the county was $13,432.  About 20.20% of families and 26.00% of the population were below the line, including 33.90% of those under age 18 and 24.70% of those age 65 or over.In the mid-2000s, Taylor County was noted in national news media as being one of the last areas in the South to hold racially segregated proms.  Taylor County High Schools first integrated prom was held 2002, but was not repeated the following year.(CNN)(Films.com) The event was the basis for the 2006 movie One Night.Controversial education website http://detentionslip.org created a music video documenting the segregated proms at http://www.detentionslip.org/2009/05/segregated-prom-dance-remix.htmlCities and towns*Butler*Reynolds*Howard (Unincorporated)*Mauk (Unincorporated)*Rupert (Unincorporated)*Potterville (Unincorporated)See also*Register of Historic Places listings in Taylor County, GeorgiaExternal links*References  (, )County (Georgia)de Taylor (Georgia)de Taylor (Gorgie), di Taylor (Georgia)(comitatus Georgiae)County (Georgia)County (Georgia)County (Georgia)de Taylor (Gergia)(, )County, Georgia(, )Taylor, Georgia()
96997
El_Paso_County,_Colorado
200px|right|thumb|Isolated rural house snuggled next to mountain in northern El Paso County200px|right|thumb|Summer greenery of El Paso CountyEl Paso County is the most populous of the 64 counties of the state of Colorado of the States, now above County. The States Census Bureau concluded that the county population was 622,371 in 2010.() In recent years, the population has come closer and closer to the population of County, surpassing it in 2010.  The seat is Colorado Springs, the second most populous city in Colorado. The Springs Metropolitan Statistical Area comprises El Paso County and Teller County.El Paso County is located in 5th congressional district. Since its creation in 1871, El Paso County has typically voted for the Republican presidential candidate in presidential elections; the last Democratic nominee to win the county was B. Johnson in 1964. The Democratic Party won El Paso County four additional times prior, and the Populist Party won in 1892, with General B. Weaver.In 2004, the voters of Colorado Springs and El Paso County established the Pikes Peak Rural Transportation Authority (PPRTA) and adopted a 1% sales tax dedicated to improving the regions transportation infrastructure. Together with state funding for COSMIX (2007 completion) and the I-25 interchange with Highway 16 (2008 completion), significant progress has been made since 2003 in addressing the transportation needs of the area. History In July 1858, gold was discovered along the Platte River in County, Kansas Territory. This discovery precipitated the Peak Gold Rush. Many residents of the mining region felt disconnected from the remote territorial governments of Kansas and Nebraska, so they voted to form their own of Jefferson on 1859-10-24. The following month, the Jefferson Territorial Legislature organized 12 counties for the new territory including El Paso County. El Paso County was named for the language name for Pass north of Peak.  Colorado City served as the seat of El Paso County.The Jefferson Territory never received federal sanction, but on 1861-02-28, President Buchanan signed an act organizing the of Colorado.()  El Paso County was one of the original 17 counties created by the Colorado legislature on November 1, 1861. Part of its western territory was broken off to create Teller County in 1899. Originally based in Old Colorado City (now part of Springs, not todays Colorado City between Pueblo and Walsenburg), El Paso Countys county seat was moved to Colorado Springs in 1873.GeographyPaso County Fairground.jpg|thumb|200px|El Paso County Fairgrounds in Calhan, Colorado.According to the 2000 census, the county has a total area of , of which  (or 99.85%) is land and  (or 0.15%) is water.()Adjacent counties* Douglas County - north* Elbert County - north and east* Lincoln County - east* Crowley County - southeast* Pueblo County - south* Fremont County - west* Teller County - westMajor highways*20px Interstate 25*20px U.S. Highway 24*20px U.S. Highway 85*20px State Highway 83*20px State Highway 94*20px State Highway 115DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 516,929 people, 192,409 households, and 133,916 families residing in the county. The density was 243 people per square mile (94/km). There were 202,428 housing units at an average density of 95 per square mile (37/km). The racial makeup of the county was 81.19% White, 6.51% Black or African American, 0.91% Native American, 2.53% Asian, 0.24% Pacific Islander, 4.70% from other races, and 3.91% from two or more races. 11.30% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 192,409 households out of which 36.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.60% were married couples living together, 10.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.40% were non-families. 23.90% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.11.In the county the population was spread out with 27.60% under the age of 18, 10.50% from 18 to 24, 32.50% from 25 to 44, 20.70% from 45 to 64, and 8.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females there were 100.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.80 males.The median income for a household in the county was $46,844, and the median income for a family was $53,995. Males had a median income of $35,940 versus $26,252 for females. The capita income for the county was $22,005. About 5.70% of families and 8.00% of the population were below the line, including 10.00% of those under age 18 and 6.90% of those age 65 or over. Government Image:El Paso County Justice Center by David Shankbone.jpg|thumb|El Paso County Justice Center in Springs.El Paso County is governed by a Board of County Commissioners. Its current members are Amy Lathen, Sallie Clark, Dennis Hisey, Darryl Glenn, and Peggy Littleton.El Paso County commissioners are expecting a projected $7.5 million shortfall in the 2008 budget.()The Department of Corrections has its headquarters in an unincorporated area in the county.(Contacts. Department of Corrections. Retrieved on December 7, 2009.)(Council District Map.  City of Colorado Springs. Retrieved on December 7, 2009.) Cities and towns *Calhan*Colorado Springs*Fountain*Green Mountain Falls*Manitou Springs*Monument*Palmer Lake*RamahCensus-designated places and unincorporated areasImage:Peyton Colorado by David Shankbone.jpg|thumb|Colorado.*Air Force Academy*Black Forest*Cascade-Chipita Park*Cimarron Hills*Ellicott*Falcon*Fort Carson*Gleneagle*Peyton*Security-Widefield*Rush*Stratmoor*Truckton*Woodmoor*YoderMilitary sites*States Air Force Academy*Mountain*American Aerospace Defense Command*Air Force Base*Air Force Base* Fort Carson Army Base State park*Mountain State ParkNational forestImage:Pikes Peak from Colorado Springs by David Shankbone.jpg|thumb|Peak dominates the countys skyline.*National ForestHistoric sites*Peak National Historic Landmark*USAFA Cadet Area National Historic District Trails*Discovery Trail*National Recreation Trail*White House Ranch National Recreation TrailSee also*Paso County, Jefferson Territory*census statistical areas*metropolitan areas*municipalities*Range Urban Corridor*Register of Historic Places listings in El Paso County, ColoradoReferencesExternal links*El Paso County Government website*Colorado County Evolution by Don Stanwyck*Colorado Historical Society    (, )Paso County (Colorado)Paso County (Colorado)de El Paso (Colorado)dEl Paso (Colorado) , di El Paso (Colorado)Paso County (Colorado)()Paso County (Colorado)  Paso County (Colorado)El Paso (Kolorado)de El Paso (Colorado)Paso CountyPaso County, Colorado(, )El Paso, Colorado()
98221
United_States_Marshals_Service
 reference       The United States Marshals Service (USMS) is a States federal law enforcement agency within the States Department of Justice (see ). The office of U.S. Marshal is the oldest federal law enforcement office in the States; it was created by the Act of 1789. It assumed its current name in 1969.( )The Marshals Service is part of the executive branch of government, and is the enforcement arm of the States federal courts. The U.S. Marshals are responsible for the protection of court officers and buildings and the effective operation of the judiciary. The service also assists with court security and prisoner transport, serves warrants, and seeks fugitives.HistoryThe U.S. Marshals Service is the oldest law enforcement agency of the federal government in the United States. The Marshals Service itself, as a federal agency, was not created until 1969. It succeeded the Executive Office for United States Marshals, itself created in 1965 as the first organization to supervise U.S. Marshals nationwide.(()However, the office of U.S. Marshal for each judicial district is much older, as old as the federal courts themselves. The office was created by the first U.S. Congress in the Judiciary Act of 1789. Although the Act did not say that the U.S. Marshal was a law enforcement officer or a peace officer, the Act did specify that the U.S. Marshals primary duty was to execute all lawful precepts directed to him, and issued under the authority of the United States.(Judiciary Act of 1789  27) The U.S. Marshal for the district served a term of four years but could be removed at pleasure and had the power to appoint deputies, who could be removed by the federal court they served. The U.S. Marshal could also command all necessary assistance in the execution of his duty.(In a letter to Randolph, the first States Attorney General, President Washington wrote,:Impressed with a conviction that the due administration of justice is the firmest pillar of good Government, I have considered the first arrangement of the Judicial department as essential to the happiness of our Country, and to the stability of its political system; hence the selection of the fittest characters to expound the law, and dispense justice, has been an invariable object of my anxious concern.Many of the first U.S. Marshals had already proven themselves in military service during the Revolution. Among the first marshals were Adamss son-in-law Congressman Stephens Smith for the district of York, another New York district Marshal, Congressman Thomas Morris, and Dearborn for the of Maine.From the earliest days of the nation Marshals were permitted to recruit Special Deputies as local hires or as temporary transfers to the Marshals Service from other federal law enforcement agencies. Marshals were also authorized to swear in a posse to assist them in manhunts and other duties ad hoc. Marshals were given extensive authority to support the federal courts within their judicial districts, and to carry out all lawful orders issued by federal judges, Congress, or the President.The Marshals and their Deputies served writs (e.g. subpoenas, summonses, warrants), and other process issued by the courts, made all the arrests, and handled all federal prisoners. They also disbursed funds as ordered by the courts. Marshals paid the fees and expenses of the court clerks, U.S. Attorneys, jurors, and witnesses. They rented the courtrooms and jail space and hired the bailiffs, criers, and janitors. They made sure the prisoners were present, the jurors were available, and that the witnesses were on time.When Washington set up his first administration, and the first Congress began passing laws, both quickly discovered an inconvenient gap in the constitutional design of the government: It had no provision for a regional administrative structure stretching throughout the country. Both the Congress and the executive branch were housed at the national capital; no agency was established or designated to represent the federal governments interests at other localities. The need for a regional organization quickly became apparent. Congress and the President solved part of the problem by creating specialized agencies, such as customs and revenue collectors, to levy tariffs and taxes, yet there were numerous other jobs that needed to be done. The only officers available to do them were the Marshals and their Deputies.File:MorganEarp.jpg|thumb|right|150px|Deputy U.S. Marshal Earp in an 1881 photographThe Marshals thus provided local representation for the federal government within their districts. They took the national census every decade through 1870. They distributed proclamations, collected a variety of statistical information on commerce and manufacturing, supplied the names of government employees for the national register, and performed other routine tasks needed for the central government to function effectively. Congress, the President, and Governors have also called on the Marshals for over 200 years to carry out unusual or extraordinary missions, such as registering enemy aliens in time of war, sealing the American border against armed expeditions from foreign countries, and, at times during the War, swapping spies with the Union, and also retrieving North Carolinas copy of the Bill of Rights.()Individual Deputy Marshals, particularly in the American West, have been seen as legendary heroes in the face of rampant lawlessness (see Famous Marshals, below). Marshals arrested the infamous Gang in 1893, helped suppress the Strike in 1894, enforced Prohibition during the 1920s, and have protected American athletes at recent Games. Marshals protected the refugee boy Gonzlez before his return to Cuba in 2000, and have protected abortion clinics as required by Federal law. The Marshals Service has been responsible for law enforcement among U.S. personnel in Antarctica since 1989.()One of the more onerous jobs the Marshals were tasked with was the recovery of fugitive slaves, as required by the Slave Act of 1850. They were also permitted to form a posse and to deputize any person in any community to aid in the recapture of fugitive slaves. Failure to cooperate with a Marshal resulted in a $5000 fine and imprisonment, a significant penalty in those days. The Rescue was a celebrated fugitive-slave case involving U.S. marshals. Batchelder was the second marshal killed in the line of duty. Batchelder, along with others, was preventing the rescue of fugitive slave Burns in Boston in 1854.Image:James Meredith OleMiss.jpg|thumb|200px|U.S. Marshals accompanying Meredith to classThe Marshals were on the front lines of the Rights Movement in the 1960s, mainly providing protection to volunteers. In September 1962, President F. Kennedy ordered 127 marshals to accompany Meredith, an American who wished to register at the segregated of Mississippi. Their presence on campus provoked riots at the university, requiring President Kennedy to federalize the Mississippi National Guard to pacify the crowd, but the marshals stood their ground, and Meredith registered. Marshals provided continuous protection to Meredith during his first year at Ole Miss, and Attorney General F. Kennedy later proudly displayed a marshals dented helmet in his office. U.S. Marshals also protected black schoolchildren integrating public schools in the South. Artist Rockwells famous painting Problem We All Live With depicted a tiny Bridges being escorted by four towering U.S. marshals in 1964.File:Zeugenschutz bei Verhandlung.jpg|thumb|left|200px|Four US Marshals protect a witness in a hearingExcept for suits by incarcerated persons, non-prisoner litigants proceeding forma pauperis, or (in some circumstances) by seamen, U.S. Marshals no longer serve process in private civil actions filed in the U.S. district courts. Under the Rules of Civil Procedure process may be served by any U.S. citizen over the age of 18 who is a not a party involved in the case.DutiesUS Marshal on a JPATS flight.The Marshals Service is responsible for apprehending wanted fugitives, providing protection for the federal judiciary, transporting federal prisoners (see JPATS), protecting endangered federal witnesses, and managing assets seized from criminal enterprises. The Marshals Service is responsible for 55.2 percent of arrests of federal fugitives. Between 1981 and 1985, the Marshals Service conducted Investigative Strike Team operations to jump-start fugitive capture in specific districts. In 2007, U.S. Marshals captured over 36,000 federal fugitives and cleared over 38,900 fugitive warrants.(http://www.usmarshals.gov/duties/factsheets/facts.pdf)The United States Marshals Service also executes all lawful writs, processes, and orders issued under the authority of the United States, and shall command all necessary assistance to execute its duties.U.S. Marshals also have the common law-based power to enlist any willing civilians as deputies.  In the Old West this was known as forming a posse, although under the Comitatus Act, they cannot use soldiers for law enforcement duties while in uniform representing their unit, or the military service. However if a soldier is off duty, wearing civilian clothing, and willing to assist a law enforcement officer on his own behalf, it is acceptable.Lastly Title 28 USC Chapter 37  564. authorizes United States marshals, deputy marshals and such other officials of the Service as may be designated by the Director, in executing the laws of the United States within a State, may exercise the same powers which a sheriff of the State may exercise in executing the laws thereof.()FirearmsAccording to the U.S. Marshals website, the primary handgun for Marshals is the Glock 22 or Glock 23 in S&W caliber, and each deputy may carry a backup handgun of their choice if it meets certain requirements. Members of the US Marshal SOG Teams are armed with M1911A1 Springfield TRP Pistol (ACP). Marshals are also equipped with AR-15s and 12-gauge shotguns.OrganizationBrief.jpg|thumb|right|Marshals are briefed for Operation FALCON III, 2008File:U.S. Marshals knock and announce.jpg|thumb|right|200px|A Deputy U.S. Marshal covers his fellow officers with an carbine during a knock-and-announce procedureThe United States Marshals Service is based in Virginia, and, under the authority and direction of the Attorney General, is headed by a Director, who is assisted by a Deputy Director. USMS Headquarters provides command, control and cooperation for the disparate elements of the service.Headquarters* Director of the U.S. Marshals Service: Hylton** Deputy Director of the U.S. Marshals Service*** Chief of Staff*** Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO)*** Office of Public Affairs (OPA)*** Office of Congressional Affairs (OCA)*** Office of Internal Communications (OIC)*** Office of General Counsel (OGC)*** Office of Inspection (OI)*** Administration Directorate (ADA)**** Training Division (TD)**** Human Resources Division (HRD)**** Information Technology Division (ITD)**** Management Support Division (MSD)**** Financial Services Division (FSD)**** Asset Forfeiture Division (AFD)*** Operations Directorate (ADO)**** Judicial Security Division (JSD)**** Investigative Operations Division (IOD)**** Witness Security Division (WSD)**** Justice Prisoner and Alien Transportation System (JPATS)**** Tactical Operations Division (TOD)*****Operations Group (SOG)**** Prisoner Operations Division (POD)DistrictsThe U.S. court system is divided into 94 federal judicial district, each with a district court. For each district there is a presidentially-appointed and Senate-confirmed United States Marshal, a Chief Deputy U.S. Marshal (GS-15) (and an Assistant Chief Deputy U.S. Marshal (GS-14) in certain larger districts), Supervisory Deputy U.S. Marshals (GS-13),() and as many Deputy U.S. Marshals (GS-5 and above)( and Special Deputy U.S. Marshals as needed. In the States federal budget for 2005, funds for 3,067 deputy marshals and criminal investigators were provided. The U.S. Marshal for States courts of appeals (the 13 circuit courts) is the U.S. Marshal in whose district that court is physically located.The Director and each United States Marshal are appointed by the of the United States and subject to confirmation by the States Senate. The District U.S. Marshal is traditionally appointed from a list of qualified law enforcement personnel for that district or state. Each state has at least one district, while several larger states have three or more. Deputy U.S. Marshals thumb|Equipment used by the USMSOPM classificationDeputy U.S. Marshals are classified Schedule (GS) 1811 Criminal Investigators,() or a basic 082 Deputy Marshals.( New Deputies are hired under the Federal Career Internship Program (FCIP). Deputy U.S. Marshals start their careers as 082 series DUSMs at either a GL-5 or GL-7 pay grade. After one year in grade they are promoted to GL-7 or GL-9, then GS-11, and finally journeyman GS-12. All deputies will now receive their 1811 status at the GS-11 pay grade. To be considered for a position as a Deputy, an individual must attend an information session, pass an oral board interview, pass an extensive background investigation, pass a medical examination, pass a drug test, pass a pre-hire fitness in total exam (FIT), and finally complete the 17 week CITP/BDUSM academy at Glynco, Georgia (FLETC).Criminal Investigators receive an additional 25% Enforcement Availability Pay on top of their base pay.The progression system for a DUSMs pay scale is finally on par with other federal law enforcement agencies. Modification of this pay scale was implemented in September 2009. This modification is automatic progression to the next higher grade after one year in each grade, up to the GS-12 level. Automatic progression to the grade of GS-13 is in the works, and is hopeful for career Deputy U.S. Marshals in the near future.As of February 2007, all Deputy US Marshal new hires receive Criminal Investigator Training and Basic Deputy US Marshal training at the onset of employment.  All previously hired 082 series DUSMs are expected to be converted to 1811 series Criminal Investigator DUSMs by early 2010.thumb|right|Marshals arrest a suspectWhen Deputies are not making arrests on the street, they can be found guarding prisoners arrested by other investigative agencies, such as the Bureau of Investigation or and Customs Enforcement, protecting government officials, processing seized assets of major crime rings for investigative agencies, relocating and providing new identities for federal witnesses in the States Federal Witness Protection Program, which is headed by the USMS.  After Congress passed the Walsh Act, the U.S. Marshals Service was chosen to head up the new federal sex offender tracking and prosecution hot team.Titles* Director of the United States Marshals Serviceoriginally titled the Chief United States Marshal, top executive of the entire US Marshals Service.(* United States Marshalfor the top executive Marshals Service position (political appointment) in a Federal judicial district.*Chief Deputy United States Marshalthe senior career manager for the Federal judicial district who is responsible for management of the Marshals office and staff.* Supervisory Deputy United States Marshalfor positions in the Marshals Service responsible for the supervision of three or more deputy U.S. marshals and clerks.* Deputy United States Marshalfor all nonsupervisory positions classifiable to this series.InspectorThis title was created for promotions within the service usually for senior non-supervisory personnel.  Senior Deputy U.S. Marshals (DUSM) assigned to the Witness Protection Program are given the title Inspector.  Senior DUSMs assigned to Regional Fugitive Task Forces or working in special assignments requiring highly skilled criminal investigators often receive the title Inspector.  Inspectors receive a GS-13 pay grade level.  The titles of Senior Inspector and Chief Inspector are also sometimes used in the service for certain assignments and positions within the agency.Special Deputy U.S. MarshalsThe Director of the Marshals Service is authorized by  (authorizing Director of Marshals Service to appoint such employees as are necessary to carry out the powers and duties of the Service) to deputize the following individuals to perform the functions of Deputy Marshals: selected officers or employees of the Department of Justice; federal, state or local law enforcement officers; private security personnel to provide courtroom security for the Federal judiciary; and other persons designated by the Associate Attorney General. The first local law enforcement officer to be deputized was Officer William Shields of the Township Police department.Court Security OfficersCourt Security Officers are contracted former law enforcement officers who receive limited deputations as armed special deputy marshals and play a vital role in courthouse security.() Using security screening systems, CSOs detect and intercept weapons and other prohibited items that individuals attempt to bring into federal courthouses. There are more than 4,700 CSOs with certified law enforcement experience deployed at more than 400 federal court facilities in the United States and its territories.Detention Enforcement OfficerDEOs (1802s) are responsible for the care of prisoners in USMS custody.  They also are tasked with the responsibility of conducting Administrative remedies for the US Marshal. DEOs can be seen transporting, booking and securing federal prisoners while in USMS custody. They also provide courtroom safety and cell block security.Detention Enforcement Officers are Deputized and fully Commissioned Federal Law Enforcement Officers by the US Marshal. They are authorized to carry firearms and conduct all official business on behalf of the agency. Not all districts employ Detention Enforcement Officers.Specialized unitsSpecial Operations Group (SOG)The Special Operations Group (SOG) is a specially trained and highly disciplined tactical unit of the US Marshals Service. It is a self-supporting response team capable of responding to emergencies anywhere in the United States or its territories. Most of the deputy marshals who have volunteered to be SOG members serve as full-time deputies in Marshals Service offices throughout the nation, and they remain on call 24 hours a day for SOG missions. The SOG also maintains a small, full-time operational cadre stationed at the Marshals Service Tactical Operations Center at Camp Beauregard, LA. There, all SOG deputies undergo extensive, specialized training in tactics and weaponry. These deputies must meet rigorous physical and mental standards. The groups missions include: apprehending fugitives; protecting dignitaries; providing court security; transporting high-profile and dangerous prisoners; providing witness security; and seizing assets.Line of duty deathsMore than 200 U.S. marshals, deputy marshals, and special deputy marshals have been slain in the line of duty since Marshal Robert Forsyth was shot dead by an intended recipient of court papers in Georgia on January 11, 1794.() He was the first US Government Law Officer killed in the line of duty.() The dead are remembered on an Honor Roll permanently displayed at Headquarters.ScandalsOn March 26, 2009, the body of Deputy U.S. Marshal Vincent Bustamante was discovered in Juarez, Mexico, according to the U.S. Marshals Service. Bustamante, who was accused of stealing and pawning government property, was a fugitive from the law at the time of his death. Chihuahua State Police said the body had multiple wounds to the headapparently consistent with an execution-style shooting.()()In January 2007, Deputy US Marshal John Thomas Ambrose was charged with theft of Justice Department property, disclosure of confidential information, and lying to federal agents during an investigation.  Deputy Ambrose had been in charge of protecting mobster turned informant Calabrese, who was instrumental in sending three mob bosses to prison for life.() A federal jury convicted Ambrose on April 27, 2009, of leaking secret government information concerning Calabrese to William Guide, a family friend and former Chicago police officer who had also served time in prison for corruption. Ambrose also was convicted of theft of government property but acquitted of lying to federal agents.() On October 27, 2009, Ambrose was sentenced to serve four years in prison.()Chief Deputy US Marshal (inactive) Matthew Fogg, a Black man, won a landmark EEO and title VII race discrimination and retaliation lawsuit against Renos Justice Department in 1998, winning $4 million. The jury found the entire USMS to be a racially hostile environment which discriminates against Blacks in its promotion practices. US District Judge P. Jackson summarized the jurors decision by stating that they felt there was an atmosphere of racial disharmony and mistrust within the United States Marshal Service.(Ramaea7.com)() As of 2011, Fogg is president of Bigots with Badges,( and executive director of CARCLE (Congress Against Racism and Corruption in Law Enforcement), and is also associated with Enforcement Against Prohibition (LEAP), a law reform organization of law enforcement officers.()CriticismAn audit by the Office of Inspector General (OIG) (November 2010) of the Justice Department found ...weaknesses in the USMSs efforts to secure federal court facilities in the six USMS district offices we visited.()The report found, among other things, that the USMS Judicial Security Division had contracted private security firms to provide CSOs (Court Security Officers) without having completed background checks. Another incident involved the USMS awarding a $300 million contract to a firm that had a known history of numerous criminal activities leading to convictions for fraud and fraud and false insurance claims in addition to a civil judgment against its Chief Financial Officer.Technical problems included CSOs not being properly trained on security screening equipment, which also meant equipment not being used. The OIG noted that in February 2009, several courthouses failed to detect mock explosives sent by USMS HQ in order to test security procedures.  They also found that eighteen percent of CSOs had outdated firearms qualifications.Notable MarshalsSome famous or otherwise noteworthy U.S. Marshals include:* J. Anderson (1938?), U.S. Marshal for the Southern District of Indiana (19771981, 19942001), Sheriff of Marion County, Indiana (20032011)* D. Bright (18121875), U.S. Marshal for Indiana; later served as Senator for that state* Bullock (18491919), businessman, rancher, sheriff for Montana, sheriff of South Dakota U.S. Marshal of South Dakota* F. Clark, U.S. Marshals Service Director and U.S. Marshal for the Eastern District of Virginia* Francis Colcord (18591934), rancher, businessman and Marshal for Oklahoma* Couzins (18391913), lawyer, first woman appointed to the US Marshals* Dearborn (17511829), Marshal for the of Maine* Douglass (18181895), former slave and noted abolitionist leader, appointed U.S. Marshal for the of Columbia in 1877* Earp (18511882), Deputy U.S. Marshal, Tombstone, Arizona, appointed by his brother Wyatt* Earp (18431905), Deputy U.S. Marshal, Tombstone, Arizona* Earp (18481929), Deputy U.S. Marshal (appointed to his brother Virgil Earps place by the Arizona Territorial Governor)* Richard Griffith (18141862), General in the Confederacy during the Civil War* Bill Hickok (18371876), noted Western lawman, who served as a Deputy U.S. Marshal at Riley, Kansas in 18671869* Reeves (July 1838  January 1910) is thought by most to be one of the first Black men to receive a commission as a U.S. Deputy Marshal west of the Mississippi River. Before he retired from federal service in 1907, Reeves had arrested over 3,000 felons.* Hill Lamon (18261893), friend, law partner and frequent bodyguard of President Lincoln, who appointed him U.S. Marshal for the of Columbia.* J. McAlester (18421920), U. S. Marshal for Territory (18931897), Confederate Army captain, merchant in and founder of McAlester, Oklahoma as well as the developer of the coal mining industry in eastern Oklahoma, one of three members of the first Corporation Commission (19071911) and the second Governor of Oklahoma (19111915).* McCulloch (18111862), U.S. Marshal for Eastern District of Texas; became a general in the army of the States during the Civil War* Eustace McCulloch (18161895), U.S. Marshal for Eastern District of Texas. Brother of Benjamin McCulloch; also a Confederate General* J. P. McShane (19091968), Appointed U.S. Marshal for the District of Columbia by President F. Kennedy then named Chief Marshal in 1962* W. Marshall, U.S. Marshal for the Eastern District of Virginia (19941999), first African-American to serve as Director of the U.S. Marshals Service (19992001)* Masterson (18531921), noted Western lawman; Deputy to US Marshal for Southern District of New York, appointed by Roosevelt* Meek (18101875), Territorial Marshal for Oregon* Thomas Morris (17711849), Marshal for York District.* Massey Rector (18161899), Marshal for Arkansas, later governor of that state* Rockwell (c.18131878),  deputy marshal for Utah* Stephens Smith (17551816), 1789 U.S. Marshal for York district and son-in-law of President Adams* Stoudenmire (18451882), successful City Marshal who tamed and controlled a remote, wild and violent town of Paso, Texas; became U.S. Marshal serving West Texas and New Mexico Territory just before his death* Thomas (18501912), Tilghman (18541924), and Madsen (18511944), the legendarily fearless Guardsmen of the Territory* F. Wheeler (18241894), Marshal for the Territory* E. Williams (19301999), Marshal for South Carolina, of Honor recipient.Fugitive programs15 Most WantedThe Marshals Service publicizes the names of wanted persons it places on the list of Marshals 15 Most Wanted Fugitives,() which is similar to and sometimes overlapping the Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list or the of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives Most Wanted List, depending on jurisdiction.(ATF Online  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms)(15 Most wanted website)The 15 Most Wanted Fugitive Program was established in 1983 in an effort to prioritize the investigation and apprehension of high-profile offenders who are considered to be some of the countrys most dangerous fugitives.  These offenders tend to be career criminals with histories of violence or whose instant offense(s) pose a significant threat to public safety.  Current and past fugitives in this program include murderers, offenders, major drug kingpins, crime figures, and individuals wanted for high-profile financial crimes.Major casesThe Major Case Fugitive Program was established in 1985 in an effort to supplement the successful 15 Most Wanted Fugitive Program.  Much like the 15 Most Wanted Fugitive Program, the Major Case Fugitive Program prioritizes the investigation and apprehension of high-profile offenders who are considered to be some of the countrys most dangerous individuals.  All escapes from custody are automatically elevated to Major Case status.()References in pop cultureThe 1993 film The Fugitive, and its 1998 sequel U.S. Marshals, follow the operations of a fictional unit of U.S. Marshals, led by Lee Jones as Deputy United States Marshal Samuel Gerard.The novel of Sight by Leonard tells the story of a romance between a U.S. Marshal and a bank robber.  In 1998, the book was made into a movie staring Clooney, Lopez and Rhames.  The character of the U.S. Marshal was later reprised by Gugino in the short-lived TV series Sisco.In 2006 the SciFi Channel launched the original series Eureka in which the main protagonist is a United States Marshal named Carter, and set in the fictional town of Eureka.  Jack stumbles on the highly secure location where the government works on super high-tech programs, and in the course of assisting with an investigation, becomes the town sheriff.In 2008, Network (owned by NBC) launched Plain Sight, a drama showcasing the States Federal Witness Protection Program (WITSEC).In 2010, Network aired the television series Justified following the life of Deputy US Marshal Givens (played by Olyphant, who also played another U.S. Marshal, Seth Bullock, in the TV series Deadwood).In 2011, Swim aired the satirical television series Eagleheart, following cases on US Marshals Chris Monsanto (Elliott), Susie Wagner (Thayer), and Brett Mobley (Gelman, and parodies many cop shows, most notably Texas Ranger. It is also produced by Conan OBriens company Conaco.In the fall of 2010, NBC launched a new drama, Chase, which follows U.S. Marshal Annie Frost.(Chase at NBC.com)Beginning in 2004, the character Edward Mars in Season 1 and Season 6 of the TV series Lost portrays a U.S. Marshal obsessed with apprehending Kate Austen, a character who has murdered her abusive stepfather and previously escaped from the same marshal.Since 2008, A&E Network has aired Manhunters: Fugitive Task Force, following the NY/NJ Regional Task Force of the US Marshal ServiceThe 2010 movie, True Grit, follows fictional Deputy US Marshal Rooster Cogburn, played by Bridges, as he tracks down a fugitive; it  is a remake of a 1969 movie of the same name, with fictional Deputy US Marshal Rooster Cogburn being played by Wayne.From 1955 to 1975 Gunsmoke ran on CBS, about Matt Dillon, a U.S. Marshal for Dodge City, Kansas. Dillon was played by James Arness, who died June 3, 2011, and who was awarded two honorary US Marshal Badges by the Marshals Service.(Obtained from Mr. Arnesss official website)See also* of the United States Supreme Court* of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF)* Constable* Diplomatic Security Service, U.S. State Department (DSS)* Enforcement Administration (DEA)* Eagleheart - TV Show about 3 marshals airing on Adult Swim* Air Marshal Service* Bureau of Investigation (FBI)* Bureau of Prisons* law enforcement in the United States* Fugitive* Snake Massacre* and Customs Enforcement (ICE)* Informant* Prisoner and Alien Transportation System* enforcement agency* of fictional U.S. Marshals* Marshal* Sheriff* operation* tapping* states evidence* Undercover* States Border Patrol* States Customs and Border Protection (CBP)* States District Court* States Federal Witness Protection Program* States Secret ServiceNotesExternal links* U.S. Marshals Service* Court Security Programincludes role in CSOs* Authority of FBI agents, serving as special deputy United States Marshals, to pursue non-federal fugitives* Deputization of Members of Congress as Special Deputy U.S. Marshals* USC on the US Marshals Service* Retired US Marshals Association* U.S. Diplomatic Security Service (DSS)States Marshals Servicede Alguaciles de Estados Unidoseu:USMSStates Marshals ServiceStates Marshals Service   Valstij maral tarnybaStates Marshals Serviceja:Marshals ServiceStates Marshals Servicede Aguazis dos Estados Unidos States Marshals ServiceStates Marshals ServiceStates Marshals Servicezh:
99403
Post_Falls,_Idaho
Post Falls is a city in Kootenai County, Idaho, States near the Idaho state line between Washington, and dAlene, Idaho.  The population was 17,247 at the 2000 census, and grew to 27,574 people by the 2010 census, making it Idahos tenth largest city.  HistoryPost Falls is named for Post, a German immigrant who constructed a mill along the River in 1871 on land he purchased from Seltice, Chief of the dAlene Tribe. The purchase of the land is preserved in a pictograph on a granite cliff in Treaty Rock park.Geography (47.715552, -116.937926).Post Falls is located four miles (6 km) east of the Washington-Idaho border along Interstate 90 in Kootenai County and is bounded by Coeur dAlene, Idaho to the east, the State of Washington to the west, the Spokane River to the south and the Rathdrum prairie to the north. Post Falls is  east of Spokane, Washington and approximately  south of the Canadian border.ClimatePost Falls has four distinct seasons, with temperatures ranging in the 80s mid-summer and low teens during the winter. The annual average amount of sunshine ranges from about 30% in the winter, but in July and August the average rises to the 80s, as crystal clear days may linger well in fall for perfect golf and boating weather. The annual average relative humidity is 46%; average amount of rain is 29, and an average of 49 of snow.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 17,247 people, 6,369 households, and 4,668 families residing in the city.  The density was 1,786.1 people per square mile (689.3/km).  There were 6,697 housing units at an average density of 693.5 per square mile (267.7/km).  The racial makeup of the city was 96.13% White, 0.18% African American, 0.87% Native American, 0.56% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.60% from other races, and 1.61% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.55% of the population.There were 6,369 households out of which 40.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.7% were married couples living together, 10.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.7% were non-families. 20.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.71 and the average family size was 3.13.In the city the population was spread out with 30.6% under the age of 18, 8.9% from 18 to 24, 31.8% from 25 to 44, 18.9% from 45 to 64, and 9.8% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females there were 95.8 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.4 males.The median income for a household in the city was $39,061, and the median income for a family was $42,758. Males had a median income of $32,284 versus $22,798 for females. The capita income for the city was $18,692.  About 7.1% of families and 9.4% of the population were below the line, including 13.4% of those under age 18 and 7.5% of those age 65 or over.As of 2009 the per capita income for the city was $32,696Population history*2010 - 27,574*2009 - 26,053 - estimate( )*2007 - 25,358 - estimate()*2000 - 17,247*1990 - 7,389(Moffatt, Riley.  Population History of Western U.S. Cities & Towns, 1850-1990.  Lanham: Scarecrow, 1996, 97.)*1980 - 5,736*1970 - 2,371*1960 - 1,983*1950 - 1,069*1940 - 843*1930 - 509*1920 - 576*1910 - 658*1900 - 287*1890 - 400*1790 - 0Economy( ) Due to the proximity of numerous lakes, rivers and mountains, Post Falls has developed tourism and retirement communities. There is an increasing number of retail, dining and entertainment businesses locating in the City. Kootenai County traditionally has had a timber-based economy.  That is changing gradually, as the manufacturing base has become more diverse. Plus, Inc., the local economic development organization has recruited several small to medium sized firms to the county.  Manufacturing jobs are found primarily in electronics, lumber and furniture at the present.  Post Falls was the chosen location for Flexcel, Inc., a major furniture manufacturer that relocated to North Idaho nearly fifteen years ago and employs a workforce of 350.  This was done with the help of Jobs Plus, Inc. and by creating an Urban Renewal District to help build infrastructure.  This District closed out at the end of December 2001.  Jobs Plus, Inc. has also just recently helped bring Partners, a call center business (employing a workforce of 300), and Knives brought their manufacturing headquarters (workforce of 250) to the City.  Also, Wal-Mart opened its new store in January 2002, employing a workforce of 300. Construction of a private surgical hospital was completed in 2004. Sysco foods opened their distribution plant during 2005.  This project was made possible by Jobs Plus, Urban Renewal, and the City working together.  Also, a community development block grant for $500,000 was used to help fund a water tower (approximately $1,500,000 total cost) that was needed on the west side of town for development in that area.  In 2007, Cabelas opened its doors to a beautiful  retail store.  Considerable economic development activity transpired in Post Falls in 2009 including the opening of ALK Source Materials/Biopol which is a Danish pharmaceutical company, a second Super Wal-Mart store that will be located near the new Cabelas store began its construction and is slated to open in early summer 2010, and Lowes Home Improvement finalized the purchase of land adjacent to the new Wal-Mart at the Pointe at Post Falls. Force Manufacturing, a large construction equipment manufacturer, completed an addition that increased their production space by  in 2009 in order to meet the heavy demands for their mining construction products around the globe.  In 2010, additional commercial real estate activity is anticipated including the construction of the Lowes Home Improvement store mentioned earlier; a new 30,000 professional office building to house a high tech network-based solutions company named Ednetics; a 30,000 LEED certified industrial building to be the home of a subsidiary of Berg Integrated Systems will begin construction in early 2010; the State of Idaho Department of Labor will construct their new regional office here in Post Falls that will provide services to the northern five counties of Idaho; travel Centers will be constructing a new fuel center along Interstate 90 that will have a convenience store and new Jr. restaurant; Blue Dog RV is planning on constructing a new recreational vehicle showroom and maintenance facility; several restaurants are also anticipated to locate within the Pointe at Post Falls regional power center to take advantage of the retail traffic of Cabelas and Wal-Mart; the Citys downtown area is expected to see a major mixed use project also take off with infrastructure and the first phase including a hospitality component begin construction; and finally the community anticipates that construction on the Beck Road Interchange with Interstate 90 will begin this fall ultimately providing service to the Pointe at Post Falls and EXPO on the north side of the freeway and the Riverbend Commerce Park and Greyhound Event Center on the south side of the Interstate 90.EmployersAs of 2009 the major employers( ) in Post Falls were as followsTransportationPost Falls is served by I-90, which extends east and west of the panhandle of Idaho through Post Falls. Post Falls is located approximately two miles west of the junction of State Highway 41, which extends approximately  to Idaho. Post Falls is approximately  west of State Highway 95 which extends the length of Idaho to Canada.Amtrak passenger service is available in Spokane, Washington and Idaho. Bus service and taxi service are available within the immediate area. Air passenger service is available with International Airport. Education Schools within Post Falls include:Kindercenter Mullan Trail Elementary Ponderosa ElementaryPrairie View Elementary Seltice ElementaryWest Side ElementaryWest Ridge ElementaryPost Falls SchoolImmaculate Conception AcademyRiver City Middle SchoolPost Falls SchoolNew Visions High SchoolRiverbend Professional Technical Academy Calvary Chapel Bible College NorthwestIdaho College Workforce Training CenterSt. Dominic School References External links*Official City of Post Falls Website*Post Falls Chamber of Commerce*Post Falls School District #273 FallsFallsFalls, IdahoFalls, IdahoFallsru:-Falls, IdahoFallsFalls, IdahoFalls
100782
Wagonway
Image:Wagonway.jpg|thumb|220px|Outrams Eaton Gangway in July 1908 with the last train of loaded coal wagons arriving.Wagonways (or Waggonways) consisted of the horses, equipment and tracks used for hauling wagons, which preceded steam powered railways. The terms plateway, tramway and in someplaces, dramway are also found. Early developments The idea of using tracked roads is at least 2000 years old; quarries in Greece, Malta and the Empire used cut stone tracks to haul loads pulled by animals, as the Greek Diolkos did for transporting ships overland.  Around 1568, German miners working in the Mines Royal near Keswick had knowledge of tub railways, as archaeological work at the Mines Royal site at Caldbeck in the English Lake District has now confirmed the use of hunds, as track fragments have been found.(Warren Allison, Samuel Murphy, and Richard Smith, An Early Railway in the German Mines of Caldbeck in  G. Boyes (ed.), Early Railways 4: Papers from the 4th International Early Railways Conference 2008 (Six Martlets, Sudbury, 2010), 52-69.)( The wooden tubs, known as hunds (dog in German) ran on two wide boards or rails and were used to move ore within the mines. These hunds used a guide pin system, utilising the slot between the two board rails to keep them on course.The first true railways, using a flange to keep the wheel on a rail, were developed in the early 17th century. In 1604, Beaumont completed the Wagonway, built to transport coal from the mines at Strelley to Wollaton, just west of Nottingham, England.  Wagonways have been proven to exist in Broseley and in Shropshire from 1605, but it has recently been suggested that used by James Clifford to transport coal from his mines in Broseley to the river Severn was somewhat older than that at Wollaton.()(Peter King, The First Shropshire Railways in G. Boyes (ed.), Early Railways 4: Papers from the 4th International Early Railways Conference 2008 (Six Martlets, Sudbury, 2010), 70-84.)Wagonways improved coal transport by allowing one horse to deliver between  of coal per run an approximate fourfold increase. Wagonways were usually designed to carry the fully loaded wagons downhill to a canal or boat dock and then return the empty wagons back to the mine.Until the beginning of the Revolution, the rails were made of wood, were a few inches wide and were fastened down, end to end, on logs of wood or sleepers, placed crosswise at intervals of two or three feet. In time, it became a common practice to cover them with a thin flat sheathing or plating of iron, in order to add to their life and reduce friction.  This caused more wear on the wooden rollers of the wagons and towards the middle of the 18th century, led to the introduction of iron wheels, the use of which is recorded on a wooden railway near Bath in 1734.  However, the iron sheathing was not strong enough to resist buckling under the passage of the loaded wagons, so rails made wholly of iron were invented. Iron rails  The first iron rails In 1767, the Coalbrookdale Iron Works began to iron rails.  These were probably  long, with four projecting ears or lugs  by  to enable them to be fixed to the sleepers.  The rails were  wide and   thick. Later, descriptions also refer to rails  long and only  wide.() Flangeways File:Richard Trevithick railway (England).jpg|thumb|Recreated track section for original railway in England (circa 1803) as built by Trevithick. The track was originally used for horse drawn carriages. It has the flanges on the track rather than the wheels, so that it is a flangeway rather than an edgeway.A later system involved L shaped iron rails or plates, each  long and  wide, having on the inner side an upright ledge or flange,  high at the centre and tapering to a height of  at the ends, for the purpose of keeping the flat wheels on the track.Subsequently, to increase the strength, a similar flange might be added below the rail. Wooden sleepers continued to be used the rails being secured by spikes passing through the extremities but, circa 1793, stone blocks also began to be used, an innovation associated with the name of Outram, who, however, was not the first to make it. This type of rail was known as the plate-rail, tramway-plate or way-plate, names which are preserved in the modern term platelayer applied to the men who lay and maintain the way of a railway.The wheels of a flangeway were plain, and could theoretically operate on ordinary roads. This was probably not often done as the narrow wheels would dig into the surface. Edgeway, edge rails Image:Chpr fishbelly.jpg|thumb|left|220px|Cast iron fishbelly edge rail manufactured by Outram at the Company ironworks for the and High Peak Railway (1831). These are smooth edgerails for wheels with flanges.Another form of rail, the edge rail, was first used by Jessop on a line which was opened as part of the Forest Canal between Loughborough and Nanpantan in Leicestershire in 1789.  This line was originally designed as a plateway on the Outram system, but objections were raised to rails with upstanding ledges or flanges being laid on the turnpike road, this difficulty was overcome by paving, or causewaying, the road up to the level of the top of the flanges. In 1790, Jessop and his partner Outram began to manufacture edge-rails. Another example of the edge rail application was the Lock Rail Road used primarily for coal transport. This was a public railway (charging a toll) and opened for traffic in 1798. The route started at Lake Lock, Stanley, on the & Calder Navigation, near Wakefield, and ran to Outwood, a distance of approximately . Edge-rails (with a side rack) were also used on the nearby Middleton - Leeds rack Railway (a length of this rail is on display in City Museum).The wheels of an edgeway have flanges, like modern railways and tramways. Causewaying is also done on modern crossings and tramways.These two systems of constructing iron railways, the L plate-rail and the smooth edge-rail, continued to exist side by side until well on into the 19th century.  In most parts of England the plate-rail was preferred, and it was used on the Iron Railway, from Wandsworth to West Croydon, which, sanctioned by parliament in 1801, was finished in 1803, and like the Lock Rail Road was available to the public on payment of tolls, previous lines having all been private and reserved exclusively for the use of their owners. Since it was used by individual operators, vehicles would vary greatly in wheel spacing (gauge) and the plate rail coped better.In South Wales again, where in 1811 the railways were connected with canals, collieries, iron and copper works, and had a total length of nearly , the plateway was almost universal.  But in the North of England and in Scotland the edge-rail was held in greater favor, and by the third decade of the century its superiority was generally established. Wheels tended to bind against the flange of the plate rail and mud and stones would build up.thumb|220px|Lengths of fishbelly rail on stone support blocks. These are edgerails for wheels with flanges.The manufacture of the rails themselves was gradually improved. By making them in longer lengths, a reduction was effected in the number of joints, always the weakest part of the line; and another advance consisted in the substitution of wrought iron for cast iron, though that material did not gain wide adoption until after the patent for an improved method of rolling rails granted in 1820 to Birkinshaw, of the Ironworks, Northumberland.  His rails were wedge-shaped in section, much wider at the top than at the bottom, with the intermediate portion or web thinner still, and he recommended that they should be made  long, even suggesting that several of them might be welded together end to end to form considerable lengths.  They were supported on sleepers by chairs at intervals of , and were fish-bellied between the points of support. As used by Stephenson on the Stockton & Darlington and Canterbury & Whitstable lines they weighed . On the and Manchester Railway they were usually  long and weighed , and they were fastened by iron wedges to chairs weighing  each. The chairs were in turn fixed to the sleepers by two iron spikes, half-round wooden cross sleepers being employed on embankments and stone blocks  square by  deep in cuttings. The fishbellied rails, however, were found to break near the chairs and from 1834, they began to be replaced with parallel rails weighing .The wagonway had come into considerable use in connection with collieries and quarries before it was realized that for the carriage of general merchandise it might prove a serious competitor to the canals, of which a large distance had been constructed in Britain during that period.  In the article on Railways in the Supplement to the Encyclopaedia Britannica, published in 1824, it is said: It will appear that this species of inland carriage is principally applicable where trade is considerable and the length of conveyance short; and is chiefly useful, therefore, in transporting the mineral produce of the kingdom from the mines to the nearest land or water communication, whether sea, river or canal.  Attempts have been made to bring it into more general use, but without success; and it is only in particular circumstances that navigation, with the aid either of locks or inclined planes to surmount the elevations, will not present a more convenient medium for an extended trade.  It must be remembered, however, that at this time the railways were nearly all worked by horse-traction, and that the use of steam had made but little progress. Steam power In 1804, Trevithick, in the first recorded use of self propelled steam power on a railway, ran a high-pressure locomotive with smooth wheels, on an L section plateway near Tydfil, but it was found more expensive than horses.  He made three trips from the iron mines at Penydarren to the Merthyr-Cardiff Canal and each time broke the rails that were designed for horse wagon loads. In 1812, the Railway (edgeway, rack rail) successfully used twin cylinder steam locomotives made by Murray of Holbeck, Leeds.  In 1821, a wagonway was proposed that would connect the mines at West Durham, Darlington and the Tees at Stockton, Stephenson successfully argued that horse drawn wagonways were obsolete and a steam powered railway could carry 50 times as much coal.  Shortly after the completion of the and Darlington railway in 1825, coal transport prices began falling rapidly.Stationary steam engines for mining were generally available around the middle of the 18th century, wagonways and steam powered railways that had steep uphill sections would employ a cable powered by a stationary steam engine to work the inclined sections.  British troops in Lewiston, New York used a cable wagonway to move supplies to bases before the Revolutionary War.  The Stockton and Darlington had two inclined sections powered by cable.The transition from a wagonway to a fully steam powered railway was a gradual evolution.  Railways up to 1835 that were steam powered often made runs with horses when the steam locomotive were unavailable.  The and Ohio Railroad, which initially opened in 1830 with  of track, was horse powered.  Railroads powered by stationary engines and cables (Francisco cable cars) and horse-drawn trams (of Man, Bay Horse Tramway) are still in use today.In 1999, the Museum in East England replicated a steam-operated railway of 1825, the Pockerley Waggonway, going on to recreate a wooden wagonway alongside. Shunting Even in the steam age, it has been convenient to use horses in station yards to shunt wagons from one place to another.  Horses do not need lengthy times to raise steam in the boiler, and can also take short cuts from one siding to another.  At Bridge tenders were called for the supply of horses, in part because normal railway staff lacked horse handling skills. Australia A number of short and isolated lines were originally operated by horse, unless connected to the main system and converted to locomotive operation. These include:* Goolwa tramway from 1850.  Later converted to steam locomotive operation.* Broughton tramway which was always isolated until closure.* Wakefield tramway until lengthened and converted to locomotive operation. See also * rail* Horsecar* profileNotesReferences**External links* http://sine.ncl.ac.uk/view_structure_information.asp?struct_id1747 Description and photographs of the archaeological excavation of a wooden waggonway on the site of Lambton Coke Works in East England.
101158
Locust_Fork,_Alabama
Locust Fork is a town in Blount County, Alabama, States. At the 2010 census the population was 1,186 people up from 1,016 since the 2000 census. While traveling south with his troops, General Andrew Jackson camped at the fork of the river in 1813.  General Jackson carved his name in a Locust tree naming this area Locust Fork.  In the early 1800s Nick Hudson built a public inn in what is now Locust Fork.  He erected barns to shelter the horses and hogs of the Tennessee farmers who drove them to the deeper South for a more profitable market.  Locust Fork was incorporated January 18, 1977.The Locust Fork area has and continues to see strong residential growth mainly due to outflow from Jefferson County as residents there seek a more rural environment as well as a lower tax structure than is found in Jefferson County.  As a result of this growth, enrollment in schools has risen substantially.  Also, traffic along the main highway artery State Route 79 has risen and the road has become increasingly dangerous  between the termination of a divided highway four lane just north of Pinson and Locust Fork.  There has been some discussion of upgrading the road to four lane status but such work is still considered several years away.  Locust Fork will also be impacted by the eventual construction of the Northern Beltline, which is slated to cross State Route 79 just north of Pinson.  This controlled access highway (officially designatged as Interstate 422) will provide much quicker access for Locust Fork residents traveling east to Trussville or westward to Gardendale, Graysville, and Tuscaloosa.  However, this route is still 1015 years away from completion.GeographyLocust Fork is located at 335347.494 North, 863750.048 West (33.896526, -86.630569).According to the Census Bureau, the town has a total area of .  of it is land and 0.29% is water.  Locust Fork is located along one of the NE to SW ridgelines that make up the southern end of the Appalachian mountain chain.  The area has been mined for coal over the past 100 years but no current active coal mining operations exist in the immediate area.  The Locust Fork of the Black Warrior River passes the community on a Northeast to Southwest axis just north of the community.  The area is generally considered rolling hill farm country.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 1,016 people, 362 households, and 300 families residing in the town. The density was 112.7/km (292.0/mi). There were 385 housing units at an average density of 42.7/km (110.6/mi). The racial makeup of the town was 98.92% White, 0.20% Native American, 0.49% from other races, and 0.39% from two or more races. 0.49% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 362 households out of which 38.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 75.7% were married couples living together, 6.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 16.9% were non-families. 15.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.81 and the average family size was 3.12.In the town the population was spread out with 28.1% under the age of 18, 7.3% from 18 to 24, 31.4% from 25 to 44, 22.5% from 45 to 64, and 10.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females there were 102.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.5 males.The median income for a household in the town was $45,454, and the median income for a family was $41,912. Males had a median income of $36,797 versus $24,688 for females. The capita income for the town was $19,455. About 6.6% of families and 8.3% of the population were below the line, including 10.4% of those under age 18 and 13.3% of those age 65 or over.Unemployment was at 2.4%.  The average rate for the entire United States is 4.6%.TransportationLocust Fork straddles Alabama Highway 79, which is a north-south route running from Birmingham northeastward to Scottsboro. Blount County Road 13 (Most of the through traffic from Nectar uses Tabernacle Road instead) runs northwestward to connect to Alabama Highway 160 between the Hayden and Nectar communities.  Blount County Road 15 intersects Alabama 79 just north of Locust Fork and provides a connection to the county seat located at Oneonta.  Also located along County Road 15 is the acclaimed Limestone Springs Golf Course and residential development.  Nearest interstate highways are Interstate 65 located some  west of Locust Fork and Interstate 59 located some  east of Locust Fork.  Air travel is handled primarily from the Birmingham International Airport located some  southwest of Locust Fork.  Locust Fork is located along one of the two major Alabama state highways that run northeast from Birmingham to the Sand Mountain area of Guntersville, Albertville, and Boaz.  It is an alternate route from Birmingham to Huntsville and Chattanooga.GovernmentLocust Fork is an incorporated town and has a mayor and town council elected by the citizens.  The mayor and council are elected for 4 year terms.  Current Mayor is Joseph Hughes, current Council Members are Greg Sherrer, Sarah Holt, Charles Gilliland, Weslie Powell and Robert Chamblee.  The next election will be in 2012.SchoolsLocust Fork High School and Elementary School are located in the center of the town along the west side of Alabama Highway 79.  The school nickname is Hornets with school colors of green and white.  Locust Fork High School is currently classified as a 4A school under the AHSAA 6 tier classification system. There is a ratio of one teacher for every 20 students. The schools draw their students from a large portion of southern and southwestern Blount County.  The schools are part of the Blount County School System.  The high school football stadium is named Gary Pate Field in honor of a former Locust Fork football coach.Parks and Municipal FacilitiesLocust Fork has a city park located on the west side of Alabama Highway 79 just south of the high school.  The park includes a walking trail, playground for small children, picnic facilities, pavilion, barbecue pit, one baseball field, one T-ball field and one softball field. The Town Hall is open from 8-12 and 1-4, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday. The nearest golf courses are the highly acclaimed semi-private Limestone Springs (located just off Blount County Route 15 east of the town) and the public course The Plantation (located at the corner of Blount County Route 13 and Alabama Highway 160 just west of the town).ChurchesThere are several churches representing several denominations located in or near Locust Fork.BusinessesA host of small businesses and retail outlets are located in the community.  Casual fast food dining is available at two chain outlets, Subway and Jacks Hamburgers, as well as a local family diner and bakery called Daisys, open 3 days a week.  The community is served by a volunteer fire department and is patrolled by the Blount County Sheriffs Office.  There is a dental office, pharmacy and general retail in Locust Fork. Media Locust Fork is located in the Birmingham television and radio market.  Newspapers include The Birmingham News and The Blount Countian. References Fork (Alabama)Fork (Alabama)Fork, AlabamaFork, AlabamaForkFork (Alabama)ForkFork (Alabama)Fork
102024
Wetland
File:Mangrove trees in Everglades.JPG|thumb|250px|Sustainable Science. The Florida Everglades massive wetland system in the United States saw 1.7 billion gallons of fresh water flushed from it daily and pumped into the ocean following one of the most successive water management and development projects in the country.  Sixty years later, it now home to the largest ecological restoration project in the world. (http://www.dep.state.fl.us/evergladesforever/about/default.htm)A wetland is an area of land whose soil is saturated with water either permanently or seasonally.() Wetlands are categorised by their characteristic vegetation, which is adapted to these unique soil conditions.()()The water found in wetlands can be saltwater, freshwater, or brackish.() Wetlands include swamps, marshes, and bogs, among others.() Wetlands are found on every continent except Antarctica.() One of the worlds largest natural wetlands is the Pantanal, which straddles Brazil, Bolivia and Paraguay in America.() The main functions of wetlands are as water purification systems, flood control, shoreline stability, and as reservoirs of biodiversity. ()  Wetlands may be converted for agriculture or development or constructed as a water management tool as in the recent developing field of Sensitive Urban Design. The study of wetlands has recently been termed paludology in some publications.(http://psjc.icm.edu.pl/psjc/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?AAAA015683) Wetlands also are known internationally as inland water, or coastal/marine ecosystems.() The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment determined that environmental degradation is more prominent within wetland systems than any other ecosystem on Earth. International conservation efforts and the development of rapid assessment tools are being used in conjunction with each other to inform people about wetland issues.   Technical definitions Wetlands have been categorized both as biomes and ecosystems. A patch of land that develops pools of water after a rain storm would not be considered a wetland though the land is wet.  Wetlands have unique characteristics: they are generally distinguished from other bodies or landforms based on their level and on the types of plants that thrive within them. Specifically, wetlands are characterized as having a table that stands at or near the surface either permanently or seasonally for a long enough period each year to support plants.(http://www.cvwd.net/water_glossary.htm)(http://mapping2.orr.noaa.gov/portal/calcasieu/calc_html/resources/glossary.html) A concise definition is a community composed of soil and hydrophytes.() Wetlands have also been described as ecotones, providing a transition between dry land and bodies.(http://www.alabamapower.com/hydro/glossary.asp) Mitsch and Gosselink write that wetlands exist ...at the interface between truly terrestrial ecosystems and  aquatic systems, making them inherently different from each other, yet highly dependent on both.()In environmental-decision making, there are subsets of definitions that are agreed upon to make regulatory and policy decisions.  Ramsar Convention definition Under the Ramsar international wetland conservation treaty, an international agreement signed by 160 countries, wetlands are defined as follows:*Article 1.1: ...wetlands are areas of marsh, fen, peatland or water, whether natural or artificial, permanent or temporary, with water that is static or flowing, fresh, brackish or salt, including areas of marine water the depth of which at low tide does not exceed six metres.*Article 2.1: Wetlands may incorporate riparian and coastal zones adjacent to the wetlands, and islands or bodies of marine water deeper than six metres at tide lying within the wetlands. Regional definitions In the United States, wetlands are defined as those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.(EPA Regulations listed at 40 CFR 230.3(t)) This definition has been used in the enforcement of the Water Act. Some US states, such as Massachusetts and York, have separate definitions that may differ from the federal government. Characteristics Wetlands vary widely due to local and regional differences in topography, hydrology, vegetation, and other factors, including human disturbance. Wetlands can be divided into two main classes: tidal and non-tidal areas.()  Hydrology Wetland hydrology is associated with the spatial and temporal dispersion, flow and physiochemical attributes of surface and ground water in its reservoirs. Based on hydrology, wetlands can be categorized as riverine, lacustrine and palustrine. Sources of hydrological flows into wetlands are predominately precipitation, surface water and ground water. Water flows out of wetlands by evapotranspiration, surface run-off and sub-surface water outflow. Hydrodynamics (the movement of water through and from a wetland) affects hydroperiods (temporal fluctuations in water levels) by controlling the water balance and water storage within a wetland.( Richardson, JL, Arndt, JL & Montgomery, JA 2001, Hydrology of wetland and related soils in JL Richardson & MJ Vepraskas (eds), Wetland Soils, Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton)Landscape characteristics control wetland hydrology and hydro-chemistry. The O2 and CO2 concentrations of water depend on temperature and atmospheric pressure. Hydro-chemistry within wetlands is determined by the pH, saline content, nutrients, conductivity, soil composition, hardness and the sources of water. Water chemistry of wetlands varies across landscapes and climatic regions. Wetlands are generally minerotrophic with the exception of bogs. Bogs receive their water from the atmosphere and therefore their water has low mineral ionic composition because ground water has a higher concentration of dissolved nutrients and minerals in comparison to precipitation. The water chemistry of fens ranges from low pH and low minerals to alkaline with high accumulation of calcium and magnesium because they acquire their water from precipitation as well as ground water.( Vitt, DH & Chee, W 1990, The relationships of vegetation to surface water chemistry and peat chemistry in fens of Alberta, Canada, Plant Ecology, vol. 89, no. 2, pp. 87-106.)   The role of salinity Salinity has a strong influence on wetland water chemistry. In non-riverine wetlands, natural salinity is regulated by interactions between ground and surface water, which may be influenced by human activity.( Smith, MJ, Schreiber, ESG, Kohout, M, Ough, K, Lennie, R, Turnbull, D, Jin, C & Clancy, T 2007 Wetlands as landscape units: spatial patterns in salinity and water chemistry, Wetlands, Ecology & Management, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 95-103.) Soil Carbon is the major nutrient cycled within wetlands. Most nutrients, such as sulfur, phosphorus, carbon and nitrogen are found within the soil of wetlands. Anaerobic and respiration in the soil influences the nutrient cycling of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen,( Ponnamperuma, FN 1972, The chemistry of submerged soils, Advances in Agronomy, vol. 24, pp. 2996.) and the solubility of phosphorus(Moore Jr., PA & Reddy, KR 1994, Role of Eh and pH on phosphorus geochemistry in sediments of Lake Okeechobee, Florida Journal of Environmental Quality, vol. 23, pp. 955964.) thus contributing to the chemical variations in its water. Wetlands with low pH and saline conductivity may reflect the presence of acid sulfates(Minh LQ, Tuong TP, van Mensvoort MEF, Bouma J 1998 Soil and water table management effects on aluminum dynamics in an acid sulphate soil in Vietnam, Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 255262.) and wetlands with average salinity levels can be heavily influenced by calcium or magnesium.  Biogeochemical processes in wetlands are determined by soils with low redox potential.(Schlesinger, WA 1997, Biogeochemistry: An analysis of global change, 2nd edn, Academic Press, San Diego) Biota The biota of a wetland system includes its vegetation zones and structure as well as animal populations and distribution which are highly dependent on water chemistry. The chemistry of water flowing into wetlands depends on the source of water and the geological material in which it flows through(Bedford, BL 1996, The need to define hydrologic equivalence at the landscape scale for freshwater wetland mitigation, Ecological Applications, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 57-68.) as well as the nutrients discharged from organic matter in the soils and plants at higher elevations in slope wetlands.(Nelson, ML, Rhoades, CC & Dwire, KA 2011, Influences of Bedrock Geology on Water Chemistry of Slope Wetlands and Headwaters Streams in the Southern Rocky Mountains, Wetlands, vol. 31, pp. 251-261.)  Biota may vary within a wetland due to season or migratory animals.  Flora There are four main groups of hydrophytes that found in wetland systems throughout the world.() Submerged water plants. This type of vegetation in found completely underwater. It may range from sea grasses in inter-tidal zones to ribbonweed, the most common native plant found within Australian waterways. Submerged wetland vegetation can grow in saline and fresh-water conditions and may still possess a peak growing season. Endemic submerged species provide a food source for native fauna, habitat for invertrebrates, and also possess filtration capabilities.  Floating water plants. Floating vegetation is usually small although it may take up a large surface area in a wetland system. These hydrophytes have small roots and are only found in slow-moving water with rich-nutrient level water Floating aquatic plants are a food resource for avian species. A common example seen in wetland systems is the pad or the Australian native duckweed. Emergent water plants. Emergent water plants  can seen above the surface of the water but whose roots are completely submerged. These hydrophytes will store nutrients and will proliferate to counter-balance harmful blooms and invasive species. Common rush is a common native emergent water plan found in the continent of Australia. It can grow up to one metre high and flowers in spring and summer. Surrounding trees and shrubs. Surrounding wetland vegetation can be riparian or forested. Riparian vegetation grows close to river bank or coastal area stabilizing the shore, providing shade to regulate water temperature, and provides habitat to native communities. Trees surround many wetland areas promoting a carbon sink, stabilization, wind breaks, and erosion control. The Paperbark tree in Australia is commonly found in still or slow-moving water in swamps and creeks.  Fauna  Fish: Fish are the more dependent on wetland ecosystems than any other type of habitat. Every single species of fresh and saltwater fish spend part of its life-cycle in a coastal wetlands such as estuaries and mangroves. 75% of the United States commercial fish and shellfish stocks depend solely on estuaries to survive.() In addition through the wetlands of the coral reef system, critical hatchery and nursery grounds are maintained for many tropical fish species. Amphibians: Frogs are the most crucial amphibian species in wetland systems. Frogs need both terrestrial and aquatic habitats in which to reproduce and feed.  While tadpoles control algal populations, adult frogs forage on insects. Frogs are used as an indicator of ecosystem health due to their thin skin which absorbs both nutrient and toxins from the surrounding environment resulting in an above extinction rate in unfavorable and polluted environmental conditions.() 	 Reptiles: Alligators and crocodiles are two common reptilian species. Alligators are found in fresh water along with the fresh water species of the crocodile. The saltwater crocodiles is found in estuaries and mangroves and can be seen in the coastline bordering the Barrier Reef in Australia. The Florida Everglades is the only place in the world where both crocodiles and alligators co-exist.(http://www.dep.state.fl.us/evergladesforever/about/default.htm) Snakes, lizards, goannas, and turtles also can be seen throughout wetlands. Mammals: Multiple small mammals as well as large herbivore and apex species such as the Florida Panther live within and around wetlands.  The wetland ecosystem attracts mammals due to its prominent seed sources,  invertebrate populations and numbers of small reptiles and amphibians. Marsupials: The platypus (Ornithorhynchus anatinus)  The platypus is found in eastern Australia living in freshwater rivers or lakes, and create burrows for shelter and protection. They are active mainly at nighttime hours, and use their webbed feet for swimming. Platypuses feed on insect larvae, worms or other freshwater insects. They do so mainly at night, by the use of their bill. They turn up mud on the bottom of the lake or river, and with the help of their electroreceptors located on the bill, find many insects and freshwater insects. They store their findings in special pouches behind their bill, and are consumed upon returning to the surface.( Taken from Australian fauna. )Insects and invertebrates: these species total more than half of the 100,000 known animal species. Insects and invertebrates can be submerged in the water or soil, on the surface and in the atmosphere. Algae  Algae are diverse water plants that can vary in size, colour and shape. Algae occur naturally in habitats such as inland lakes, inter-tidal zones and  damp soil and provide a dedicated food source for animals, fish, and invertebrates. There are three main groups of algae:Plankton are algae which are microscopic, free-floating algae that make the water look green or brown. This algae is so tiny that on average, if fifty of these microscopic algae were lined up end-to-end, it would only measure one millimetre. The plankton algae are at the start of the food chain and are therefore an important food source for all other organisms. algae which are long strands of algae cells that form floating mats. Chara and Nitella algae are upright algae that look like a submerged plant with roots.(Taken from Blacktown Council Wetland Inventory)Biota importanceMany of the flora and fauna that are part of wetlands are disappearing. As most species are endemic to wetlands, biologists and other scientists routinely census wetland biota. The IUCNs red list(IUCN.org) can be accessed to determine if any wetland species existence is presently threatened. Climates TemperatureImage:MiddleSpring.JPG|thumb|Wetlands contrast the hot, arid landscape around Middle Spring, Springs National Wildlife Refuge, Utah.Temperatures vary greatly depending on the location of the wetland. Many of the worlds wetlands are in temperate zones (midway between the North or South Pole and the equator). In these zones, summers are warm and winters are cold, but temperatures are not extreme. However, wetlands found in the tropic zone, around the equator, are warm year round. Wetlands on the Peninsula, for example, can reach 50 C (122 F) and would therefore be subject to rapid evaporation. In northeastern Siberia, which has a polar climate, wetland temperatures can be as low as 50 C (58 F). In a moderate zone, such as the of Mexico, a typical temperature might be 11 C (51 F).RainfallThe amount of rainfall a wetland receives varies widely according to its location. Wetlands in Wales, Scotland, and Western Ireland typically receive about 1500 mm (or 60 in) per year. In some places in Southeast Asia, where heavy rains occur, they can receive up to 10,000 mm (about 200 in). In the northern areas of North America, wetlands exist where as little as 180 mm (7 inches) of rain fall each year.Temporal variation:() *Perennial systems *Seasonal systems *Episodic (periodic or intermittent) systems*Surface flow may occur in some segments, with subsurface flow in other segments*Ephemeral (short-lived) systems*Migratory species   Human-disturbance:() 	*	Encroachment**	Drainage**	Development**	Over-grazing**	Mining**	Unsustainable water use*	Ecosystem Stress**	Scarcity **	Endangered species**	Disruption of breeding grounds**	Imbalance in sediment load and nutrient filtrationThe peatswamps of South-east AsiaIn Southeast Asia, peatswamp forests and soils are being drained, burnt, mined, and overgrazed contributing severely to climate change.()  As a result of peat drainage, the organic carbon that was built up over thousands of years and is normally under water, is suddenly exposed to the air. It decomposes and turns into dioxide (CO2), which is released into the atmosphere. Peat fires cause the same process and in addition create enormous clouds of smoke that cross international borders, such as happen every year in Southeast Asia. Peatlands form only 3% of all the worlds land area, however, their degradation equals 7% of all fuel CO2 emissions.Through the building of dams, International is halting the drainage of peatlands in Southeast Asia, hoping to mitigate CO2 emissions. Concurrent wetland restoration techniques include reforestation with native tree species as well as setting up community fire brigades. This sustainable approach can be seen in Central Kalimantan and Sumatra, Indonesia. AquacultureConcerns are developing over farm fishing, a practice especially popular within Asia and the South Pacific and its influence on many small island developing states.(http://www.fao.org/figis/servlet/static?%20domroot&xmlindex.xml )Ecosystem Services.The function of natural wetlands can be classified by their ecosystem benefits. The United Nations Millennium Ecosystem Assessment and Ramsar Convention found wetlands to be of biosphere significance and societal importance in the following areas:	Flood control 	Groundwater replenishment	 	Shoreline stabilisation and storm protection	 	Water purification	 	Reservoirs of biodiversity	 	Wetland products	 	Cultural values	 	Recreation and tourism	 	Climate change mitigation and adaptationThe economic worth of the ecosystem services provided tosociety by intact, naturally functioning wetlands isfrequently much greater than the perceived benefits ofconverting them to more valuable intensive land use particularly as the profits from unsustainable use often go torelatively few individuals or corporations, rather than beingshared by society as a whole.-Ramsar convention Unless otherwise cited,Ecosystem services is based on the following series of references.()  Flood control. Major wetland type: floodplainStorage Reservoirs and Flood Protection. The wetland system of floodplains is formed from major rivers downstream from their headwaters. Notable river systems that produce large spans of floodplain include the River (Africa), River (USA), River (South America), River (China), River (Central Europe) and Murray-Darling River (Australia). The floodplains of major rivers act as natural storage reservoirs, enabling excess water to spread out over a wide area, which reduces its depth and speed. Wetlands close to the headwaters of streams and rivers can slow down rainwater runoff and spring snowmelt so that it doesnt run straight off the land into water courses. This can help prevent sudden, damaging floods downstream.()Human-Impact. Converting wetlands through drainage and development have contributed to the issue of irregular flood control through forced adaption of water channels to narrower corridors due to loss of wetland area. These new channels must manage the same amount of precipitation causing flood peaks to be or deeper and floodwaters to travel faster. Water management engineering developments in the past century have degraded these wetlands through the construction on artificial embankments. These constructions may be classified as dykes, bunds,  levees, weirs, barrages and dams but serve the single purpose of concentrating water into a select source or area. Wetland water sources that were once spread over slowly over a large, shallow area are pooled into deep, concentrated locations. Loss of wetland floodplains results in more severe and damaging flooding. Catastrophic human impact in the Mississippi River floodplains was seen in death of several hundred individuals during a levee breach in New Orleans caused by Hurricane Katrina. Ecological catastrophic events from human-made embankments have been noticed along the Yangtze River floodplains after the where the middle of the river has become prone to more frequent and damaging flooding including the loss of riparian vegetation, a 30% loss of the vegetation cover throughout the rivers basin, a doubling of the percentage of the land affected by soil erosion, and a reduction in reservoir capacity through siltation build-up in floodplain lakes. Groundwater replenishmentMajor wetland type: marsh, swamp, & subterranean karst and cave hydrological systemsThe surface water seen within wetland systems represents a portion of the water cycle, which also includes atmospheric water and groundwater. Wetland systems direct connection to groundwater regulates both the quantity and quality of groundwater. Wetland systems that have on permeable sediments or occur in areas with highly variable and fluctuating water tables have a role in groundwater replenishment or water recharge. Sediments that are porous allow water to filter down through the soil and overlying rock into aquifers, source of 95% of the worlds drinking water. Wetlands can also act as recharge areas when the surrounding water table is low and discharge zone when it is too high.  Karst systems are a unique example of this system housing underground rivers influenced by precipitation causing the water table to fluctuate by 130 metres. Human-Impact. Groundwater is an important source of water for drinking and irrigation of crops. Over 1 billion people in Asia and 65% of the public water sources in Europe from groundwater.  Irrigation is a massive use of groundwater. 80% of the worlds groundwater is used for agricultural production in the United States, China, India, Iran, Pakistan and Bangladesh.Unsustainable abstraction of groundwater is also a major concern. In the Commonwealth of Australia, water licensing and blank, blank is being implemented to control use of the water in the Murray-Darling floodplain. At a global scale, groundwater deficits and water scarcity is one of the most pressing concerns facing the 21st century. Shoreline stabilisation and storm protection.Wetland type:   Mangroves, Coral Reefs, SaltmarshTidal and inter-tidal wetland systems protect and stabilise coastal zones. Coral reefs provide a protective barrier to coastal shoreline. Mangroves stabilise the coastal zone from the interior and will migrate with the shoreline to remain adjacent to the boundary of the water. The main conservation benefit these systems have against storms and tidal waves is the ability to reduce the speed and height of waves and floodwaters.Human-Impact. An estimated 200 million people live in low-lying coastal regions with estimates in the billions for communities that live along the coast or projected to live in urban coastal centres in the next 50 years() 	. The United Kingdom has begun the concept of managed coastal realignment. This management technique provides shoreline protection through restoration of natural wetlands rather than through applied engineering.Water Purification.Wetland Type: Floodplain, Mudflat, Saltmarsh, MangrovesNutrient Retention. Wetlands cycle both sediments and nutrients balancing terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. A natural function of wetland vegetation is the take up and storage of nutrients found in the surrounding soil and water. These nutrients are retained in the system until the plant dies or is harvested by animals or humans. Wetland vegetation productivity is linked to the climate, wetland type, and nutrient availability. The grasses of fertile floodplains such as the Nile produce the highest yield including   plants such as Arundo donax(giant reed), Cyperus papyrus (papyrus), Phragmites (reed) and Typha (cattail, bulrush). Sediment Traps. Rainfall run-off is responsible for moving sediment through waterways. These sediments move towards larger and more sizable waterways through a natural process that moves water towards oceans. All types of sediment s composed of clay, sand, silt, and rock may be carried into wetland systems through this process. Reedbeds or floodplain forests act as physical barriers to slow waterflow and trap sediment.Water purification. Many wetland systems possess biofilters, hydrophytes and organisms that in addition to  nutrient up-take abilities have the capacity to remove toxic substances that have come from pesticides, industrial discharges and mining activities through filtration. The uptake by these plants stems, roots, and leaves has been shown to be many factors higher than the toxicity found in the wastewater. In particular, floating plants can absorb heavy metals. Eichhornia crassipes (water hyacinth), Lemna (duckweed) and Azolla (water fern) store iron and copper commonly found in wastewater. Many fast-growing plants rooted in the soils of wetlands such as Typha (cattail) and Phragmites (reed) also aid in the role of heavy metal up-take. Animals such as the oyster can filter more than 200 litres of water per day while grazing for food, removing nutrients, suspended sediments and chemical contaminants in the process. Capacity. The ability of wetland systems to store nutrients and trap sediment is highly efficient and effective but each system has a threshold. An overabundance of nutrient input from fertilizer run-off sewage effluent or non-point pollution will cause eutrophication. Upstream erosion from deforestation can overwhelm wetlands making them shrink in size and see dramatic biodiversity loss through excessive sedimentation load. The capacity of wetland vegetation to store heavy metals is affected by waterflow, number of hectares (acres), climate, and type of plant.Human-Impact. Introduced hydrophytes in different wetland systems can have devastating results. The introduction of Eichhornia crassipes, a native of South America into Lake Victoria in East Africa and Lemna into new areas in Queensland, Australia  have overtaken critical wetlands suffocating the ecosystem due to its combination of phenomenal growth rate and floating nature. Constructed WetlandsMost natural wetlands systems are not designed for wastewater treatment (Pries 1994), however their potential in treating pollutants has been recognized by environmental engineers in constructing artificial wetlands. These treatment systems are highly controlled environments that intend to mimic the occurrences of soil, flora and microorganism in natural wetlands to aid in treating wastewater effluent. Artificial wetlands have the ability to experiment with flow regimes, micro biotic composition and flora in order to produce the most efficient treatment process. Other advantages are the control of retention times and hydraulic channels (Brix, H 1993, Wastewater treatment in constructed wetlands: system design, removal processes, and treatment performance in AG Moshiri (ed), Constructed Wetlands for Water Quality Improvement, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.) The most important factors of constructed wetlands are water flow processes and plant growth. Constructed wetland systems can be surface flow systems with free-floating macrophytes, floating-leaved macrophytes or submerged macrophytes; however typical free water surface systems are constructed with emergent macrophytes(aa.	Vymazal, J & Krpfleova, L 2008, Wastewater treatment in constructed wetlands with horizontal sub-surface flow, Environmental Pollution, vol. 14.) Constructed wetlands can be adapted to treat raw sewage, secondary domestic sludge, enhancing water quality of oxidation ponds discharge, storm waters and mining, industrial and agricultural waste effluents as seen in wastewater management programs in Kolkata (Calcutta), India and Arcata, California, USA(Arcata, California Constructed Wetland: A Cost-Effective Alternative for Wastewater Treatment). Kolkatas constructed wetland. Kolkata is an example of how constructed wetlands are being utilised in developing countries. Using the purification capacity of wetlands, the Indian city ofKolkata (Calcutta) has pioneered a system of sewage disposalthat is both efficient and environmentally friendly. Built tohouse one million people, Kolkata is now home to over 10million, many living in slums. But the 8,000-hectare EastKolkata Wetlands Ramsar Site, a patchwork of tree-fringedcanals, vegetable plots, rice paddies and fish ponds  and the20,000 people that work in them  daily transform one-thirdof the citys sewage and most of its domestic refuse into a richharvest of fish and fresh vegetables.For example, the Mudialy Fishermens Cooperative Society isa collective of 300 families that lease 70 hectares into whichwastewater from the city is released. Through a series ofnatural treatment processes  including the use of Eichhorniacrassipes and other plants for absorbing oil, grease and heavymetals  the Cooperative has turned the area into a thrivingfish farm and nature park. In 2005/06, the Cooperative soldfish worth over US$135,000 and shared income of more thanUS$55,000 among its members.() Reservoirs of biodiversity.Wetland systems are extremely rich in biodiversity becoming a focal point at the Convention of Biodiversity and within the World Wildlife Fund due to the high number of species present in wetlands, the small global geographic area of wetlands, the number of species which are endemic to wetlands, and the high productivity of wetland systems. 100,000 species of animals alone 20,000 of them vertebrates, are living in wetland systems with 200 new species of freshwater fish being discovered at a rate of 200 a year. Biodiverse river basins. The Amazon holds 3,000 species of Freshwater fish species within the boundaries of its basin whose function it is to disperse the seeds of trees. Brachyplatystoma vaillantii, the Piramutaba catfish is migrates more than 3,300 km from its nursery grounds near the mouth of the Amazon River to its spawning grounds in Andean tributaries (400 m above sea level) distributing plants seed along the route.Productive intertidal zones. Intertidal mudflats have a similar productivity even while possessing a low number of species. The abundance of invertebrates found within the mud are a food source for migratory waterfowl. Critical life-stage habitat. Mudflats, saltmarshes, mangroves and seagrass beds contain bother species richness and productivity, home to important nursery areas for many commercial fish stocks.Genetic Diversity. Many wetland systems are unique due to the long period of time that the ecosystem has been physically isolated from other aquatic sources. Lake Baikal in Russia has lake species found nowhere else in the world with immense biodiversity. Baikal.()Evidence from a research study by Mazepova et. al suggest that the number of crustacean species endemic to Baikal Lake (>690 species and subspecies) exceeds the number of the same groups of animals inhabiting all freshwaters of Eurasia together. Its 150 species of free-living Platyhelminthes is  analogous in number to the number of Platyhelminthes in all water bodies in Eastern Siberia. The species and subspecies number of Baikal sculpins (34) is more than twice the number of the analogous fauna inhabiting Eurasia. One of most exciting discoveries in this field was made by A.V. Shoshin who registered about 300 species of free-living nematodes using only 6 near-shore sampling localities in the Southern Baikal. If we will take into consideration, that about 60 % of the animals can be found nowhere else except Baikal, it may be assumed that the lake may be the biodiversity centre of the Eurasian continent.Human Impact. Biodiversity loss occurs in wetland systems through land use changes, habitat destruction, pollution, exploitation of resources, and invasive species. Vulnerable, threatened, and endangered species number at 17% of waterfowl, 38% of fresh-water dependent mammals, 33% of freshwater fish, 26% of freshwater amphibians, 72% of freshwater turtles, 86% of marine turtles, 43% of crocodilians and 27% of coral reef-building species.The impact of maintaining biodiversity is seen at the local level through job creation, sustainability, and community productivity. The Lower Mekong basin which runs through Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam supports over 55 million people. Tourism is also enhanced through wildlife watching. The US state of Florida estimated US$ 1.6 billion was generated in state revenue from recreational activities associated with wildlife. Medicinal remedies have been found in native wetlands plants, such as the Red Mangrove Rhizophora mangle found in the Caribbean and Australia and known to possess antibacterial, wound-healing and anti-ulcer effects and antioxidant properties.Wetland Products.  Wetland systems naturally produce an array of vegetation and other ecological products that can harvested for personal and commercial use. The most significant of these is fish which have all or parts of their life-cycle occur in a wetland. Fresh and saltwater fish are the main source of protein for one billion people and compose 15% an additional two billion peoples diets. In addition, the fish generate the fishing industry in which over 80% provides income and employment to residents in developing countries. Another food staple found in wetland systems is rice a grain that is consumed at the rate of 1/5 of the total global calorie count. In   Bangladesh, Cambodia and Vietnam, rice consumption reach 70% with rice paddies predominant throughout Asia.  Rice is a food staple for 3 billion people worldwide and represents about one-fifth of global calorie consumption, rising to 70% in some Asian countries such as Bangladesh, Cambodia and Vietnam. Food converted to sweeteners and carbohydrates include the sago palm of Asia and Africa (cooking oil), the nipa palm of Asia (sugar, vinegar, alcohol, and fodder) and honey collection from mangroves. More than supplemental dietary intake, this produce sustains entire villages.  Coastal Thailand villages earn the key portion of their income from sugar production while the country of Cuba relocates more than 30,000 hives to track the seasonal flowering of the mangrove Avicennia.Other mangrove- derived products.	fuelwood 	salt (produced by evaporating seawater)	animal fodder	traditional medicines (e.g. from mangrove bark)	fibres for textiles	dyes and tanninsHuman Impact. Over-fishing is the major problem for sustainable use of wetlands. Other issues that occur on a global level include contribution to climate change, point and nonpoint pollution, air and water quality issues, The field of aquaculture within the fisheries industries is eliminating wetland through its destruction of mangroves especially with intensive shrimp farming. Aquaculture is developing throughout the Asia-Pacific region especially China with holdings of 90% of the total quantity and 80% of the value. Threats to rice fields mainly stem from inappropriate water management, introduction of invasive alien species, agricultural fertilisers and pesticides, and land use changes. Industrial-scale production of palm oil threatens thebiodiversity of wetland ecosystems in parts of south-east Asia, Africa and other developing country regions.Exploitation of mangroves forests can occur in magnified instances such as the coastal villages of Southern Thailand who procure fuelwood and timber along with honey, resins, crab, and shellfish from these mangroves totalling around US$924 worth of wetland products annually per household. Wetlands and climate change Scientific Projections. Low water and occasional drying of the wetland bottom during droughts (dry marsh phase) stimulate plant recruitment from a diverse seed bank and increase productivity by mobilizing nutrients. In contrast, high water during deluges (lake marsh phase) causes turnover in plant populations and creates greater interspersion of element cover and open water, but lowers overall productivity. During a cover cycle that ranges from open water to complete vegetation cover, annual net primary productivity may vary 20-fold. (Johnson W C, Millett B V, Gilmanov T, Voldseth R A, Guntenspergen G R & Naugle D E 2005 Vulnerability of Northen Prairie Wetlands to Climate Change Bio Science 10: 863-872) Mitigation and Adaption.Wetlands perform two important functions in relation to climate change. They have mitigation effects through their ability to sink carbon, and adaptation effects through their ability to store and regulate water. Conservation Wetlands have historically been the victim of large draining efforts for estate development, or flooding for use as recreational lakes. By 1993 half the worlds wetlands had been drained.() Since the 1970s, more focus has been put on preserving wetlands for their natural function  sometimes also at great expense. Wetlands provide a valuable flood control function. Wetlands are very effective at filtering and cleaning pollution,(Letting Nature Do the Job) (often from runoff from the farms that replaced the wetlands in the first place). To replace these wetland services enormous amounts of money have been spent on purification plants and remediation measures, constructing dams, levees and other artificial flood controls.	In order to produce sustainable wetlands, short-term, private-sector profits need to come secondary to global equity.  Decision-makers must valuate wetland type, provided ecosystem service, long-term benefit, and current subsidies inflating valuation on either the private or public sector side. Analysis using the impact of hurricanes versus storm protection features projected wetland valuation at US$33,000/hectare/year. ()Balancing wetland conservation with the needs of peopleWetlands are vital ecosystems that provide livelihoods for the millions of people who live in and around them. The Development Goals (MDGs) called for different sectors to join forces to secure wetland environments in the context of sustainable development and improving human wellbeing. A three-year project carried out by International in partnership with the Water Management Institute found that it is possible to conserve wetlands while improving the livelihoods of people living among them. Case studies conducted in Malawi and Zambia looked at how dambos  wet, grassy valleys or depressions where water seeps to the surface  can be farmed sustainably to improve livelihoods. Mismanaged or overused dambos often become degraded, however, using a knowledge exchange between local farmers and environmental managers, a protocol was developed using soil and water management practices. Project outcomes included a high yield of crops, development of sustainable farming techniques, and adequate water management generating enough water for use as irrigation. Before the project, there were cases where people had died from starvation due to food shortages. By the end of it, many more people had access to enough water to grow vegetables. A key achievement was that villagers had secure food supplies during long, dry months. They also benefited in other ways: nutrition was improved by growing a wider range of crops, and villagers could also invest in health and education by selling produce and saving money.(practices and lessons learned in integrating ecosystem conservation with poverty reduction objectives in wetlands | www.ramsar.org/cda/ramsar/display/main/main.jsp?znramsar&cp1-26-45-84%5E16998_4000_2__) Ramsar Convention The Convention on Wetlands of International Importance, especially as Waterfowl Habitat, or Ramsar Convention, is an international treaty designed to address global concerns regarding wetland loss and degradation. The primary purposes of the treaty are to list wetlands of international importance and to promote their wise use, with the ultimate goal of preserving the worlds wetlands. Methods include restricting access to the majority portion of wetland areas, as well as educating the public to combat the misconception that wetlands are wastelands. The Convention works closely with five International Organisation Partners. These are: International, IUCN, Water Management Institute, International and WWF. The partners provide technical expertise, help conduct or facilitate field studies and provide financial support. The IOPs also participate regularly as observers in all meetings of the Conference of the Parties and the Standing Committee and as full members of the Scientific and Technical Review Panel.Conservation by countryConservation efforts vary in intensity and method by country. New ZealandOver 90% of the wetlands in Zealand have been drained since European settlement, predominantly to create farmland. Wetlands now have a degree of protection under the Management Act.South AfricaThe African Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism in conjunction with the departments of Water Affairs and Forestry, and of Agriculture, supports the conservation and rehabilitation of wetlands through the Working for Wetlands program.(http://wetlands.sanbi.org/ Working for Wetlands) The aim of this program is to encourage the protection, rehabilitation and sustainable use of South African wetlands through co-operative governance and partnerships. The program is also a relief effort, providing employment in wetland maintenance.SwedenThe Swedish national wetland inventory (VMI) is one of the worlds most extensive systematic inventories of nature types that has ever been done. VMI has surveyed the wetlands of Sweden below the alpine region during a 25-year period.() In total 35 000 objects (sites) are included in VMI, corresponding to an area of 4.3 million hectares, or 10% of the land area of Sweden. The aim of the survey has been to increase the general knowledge of wetlands in Sweden, as a basis for environmental monitoring and natural resources planning. By investigating the impact of human activities on wetlands and identifying the most valuable wetlands, their values can be preserved for future generations. The results from the inventory were also meant to function as background data for the authorities decisions concerning e.g. drainage permits.United StatesThe USA centred its wetland conservation efforts through legislation enforcement creating requirements that if a wetland had to be drained; developers had to offset the loss through the generation of artificial wetlands. A restoration project by the State of Florida in the Everglades acquired U.S. Sugar Corporation land allowing for water delivery, water treatment and water storage of sufficient quantity and quality to mimic the Everglades natural system.() () Republic of MacedoniaThe fragments of wetland habitats that are still in existence in the Republic of Macedonia are present as marsh or swamp communities. These patches are present at Studenchishte (small fragment near Ohrid Lake), Pelagonia (village Chepigovo), Negortsi Spa, Bansko, Belchishte wetland and Monospitovo marsh. The large areas of swamps that used to be present in most of the valleys in contemporary Republic of Macedonia have undergone a great transformation over the last 50-60 years. The main cause for their reduction is land reclamation, drainage, and conversion into arable land for agricultural needs (Smith and Smith, 2003). Some of the remaining wetlands (Negortsi Spa, Bansko) are of great importance for understanding the genesis of marsh vegetation in the Republic of Macedonia as many mountainous marshes and peat bogs suffered anthropogenic transformation due to the capturing of water from mountain springs and streams for the purposes of generating drinking water (Smith, 2003). Accordingly, the fragmentation and transformation of previous swamps had a major impact on faunal distribution and abundance. Amphibians are the most affected species along with invertebrate and vertebrate groups including the European Otter (Lutra Lutra L.). It is listed as Nearly Threatened according to the IUCNs red list and mainly found now only in the Belchishte wetland (Smith 2003; Smith and Smith, 2003).  The otter has importance for the wetland communities not just in Macedonia but also in other European countries such as the Netherlands and Germany (Reuther, 1995; Reuther et al., 2001). Macedonian wetlands lie within the network of some of the bigger rivers in Macedonia including the Vardar River, a catchment area equal to 80% of Macedonian territory.  .ValuationThe value of a wetland system to the earth and to humankind is one of the mostimportant valuations that can be computed for development. A guideline involving assessing a wetland, keeping inventories of known wetlands, and monitoring the same wetlands over time is the current process that is used to educate environmental decision-makers such as governments on the importance of wetland protection and conservation.Important considerations* Constructed Wetlands take 10-100 years to fully resemble the vegetative composition of a natural wetland. * Artificial wetlands do not have hydric soil. The soil has very low levels of organic carbon and total nitrogen compared to natural wetland systems.* Organic matter can be added to degraded natural wetlands to help restore their productivity before the wetland is destroyed.( Hart T M & Davis S E, 2011, Wetland development in a previously mined landscape of East Texas, USA Wetlands Ecological Management, 19: 317-329)AssessmentRapid assessment. Five steps to assessing a wetland# Collect general biodiversity data in order to inventory and prioritize wetland species, communities and ecosystems. Obtain baseline biodiversity information for a given area.# Gather information on the status of a focus or target species (such as threatened species. Collect data pertaining to the conservation of a specific species.# Gain information on the effects of human or natural disturbance (changes) on a given area or species.# Gather information that is indicative of the general ecosystem health or condition of a specific wetland ecosystem.# Determine the potential for sustainable use of biological resources in a particular wetland ecosystem.InventoryDeveloping a global inventory of wetlands has proven to be a large and difficult undertaking. Current efforts are based on available data, but both classification and spatial resolution have proven to be inadequate for regional or site-specific environmental management decision-making. It is difficult to identify small, long, and narrow wetlands within the landscape. Many of todays remote sensing satellites do not have sufficient spatial and spectral resolution to monitor wetland conditions, although multispectral IKONOS and QuickBird data may offer improved spatial resolutions once it is 4 m or higher. Majority of the pixels are just mixtures of several plant species or vegetation types and are difficult to isolate which translates into an inability to classify the vegetation that defines the wetland. Improved remote sensing information, coupled with good knowledge domain on wetlands will facilitate expanded efforts in wetland monitoring and mapping. This will also be extremely important because we expect to see major shifts in species composition due to both anthropogenic land use and natural changes in the environment caused by climate change.  MonitoringMappingA wetland system needs to be monitored over time to in order to assess whether it is functioning at an ecologically sustainable level or whether it is becoming degraded. Degraded wetlands will suffer a loss in water quality, a high number of threatened and endangered species, and poor soil conditions. Due to the large size of wetlands, mapping is an effective tool to monitor wetlands. There are many remote sensing methods that can be used to map wetlands. Remote-sensing technology permits the acquisition of timely digital data on a repetitive basis. This repeat coverage allows wetlands, as well as the adjacent land-cover and land-use types, to be monitored seasonally and/or annually. Using digital data provides a standardized data-collection procedure and an opportunity for data integration within a information system. Traditionally, Landsat 5 Thematic Mapper (TM), Landsat 7 Enhanced Thematic Mapper Plus (ETM + ), and the SPOT 4 and 5 satellite systems have been used for this purpose. More recently, however, multispectral IKONOS and QuickBird data, with spatial resolutions of 4 m by 4 m and 2.44 m by 2.44 m, respectively, have been shown to be excellent sources of data when mapping and monitoring smaller wetland habitats and vegetation communities.For example, Detroit Lakes Wetland Management District assessed area wetlands in Michigan, USA using remote sensing. Through using this technology, satellite images were taken over a large geographic area and extended period. In addition, using this technique was less costly  and time-consuming compared to the older method using visual interpretation of photographs. In comparison, most aerial photographs also require experienced interpreters to extract information based on structure and texture while the interpretation of remote sensing data only requires analysis of one characteristic (spectral).However, there are a number of limitations associated with this type of image acquisition. Analysis of wetlands has proved difficult because to obtain the data because it is often linked to other purposes such as the analysis of land cover or land use. Practically, many natural wetlands are difficult to monitor as these areas are quite often difficult to access and require exposure to native wildlife and potential endemic disease. Further improvementsMethods to develop a classification system for specific biota of interest could assist with technological advances that will allow for  identification at a very high accuracy rate. The issue of the cost and expertise involved in remote sensing technology is still a factor hindering further advancements in image acquisition and data processing.  Future improvements in current wetland vegetation mapping could include the use of more recent and better geospatial data when it is available. List of wetland types Wetland types:  (http://www.environment.gov.au/water/publications/environmental/wetlands/directory.html)*AMarine and Coastal Zone wetlands# Marine waterspermanent shallow waters less than six metres deep at low tide; includes sea bays, straits# Subtidal aquatic beds; includes kelp beds, seagrasses, tropical marine meadows# Coral reefs# Rocky marine shores; includes rocky offshore islands, sea cliffs# Sand, shingle or pebble beaches; includes sand bars, spits, sandy islets# Intertidal mud, sand or salt flats# Intertidal marshes; includes saltmarshes, salt meadows, saltings, raised salt marshes, tidal brackish and freshwater marshes# Intertidal forested wetlands; includes mangrove swamps, nipa swamps, tidal freshwater swamp forests# Brackish to saline lagoons and marshes with one or more relatively narrow connections with the sea# Freshwater lagoons and marshes in the coastal zone# Non-tidal freshwater forested wetlands*BInland wetlands# Permanent rivers and streams; includes waterfalls# Seasonal and irregular rivers and streams# Inland deltas (permanent)# Riverine floodplains; includes river flats, flooded river basins, seasonally flooded grassland, savanna and palm savanna# Permanent freshwater lakes (> 8 ha); includes large oxbow lakes# Seasonal/intermittent freshwater lakes (> 8 ha), floodplain lakes# Permanent saline/brackish lakes# Seasonal/intermittent saline lakes# Permanent freshwater ponds ( 8 ha)# Ponds, including farm ponds, stock ponds, small tanks (generally < 8 ha)# Aquaculture ponds; fish ponds, shrimp ponds# Salt exploitation; salt pans, salines# Excavations; gravel pits, borrow pits, mining pools# Wastewater treatment; sewage farms, settling ponds, oxidation basins# Irrigated land and irrigation channels; rice fields, canals, ditches# Seasonally flooded arable land, farm land# CanalsVariations of names for wetland systems:*Swamp**swamp forest**swamp**swamp forest*Slough*grasslands and savannas*wetland*zone*Fen*PoolSee also*wetland*marshlands*conservation References  Further reading *Mitsch, W.J., J.G. Gosselink, C.J. Anderson, and L. Zhang. (2009) Wetland Ecosystems. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 295 pp.*Ghabo, A. A. (2007) Wetlands Characterization; Use by Local Communities and Role in Supporting Biodiversity in the Semiarid Ijara District, Kenya. Terra Nuova East Africa.  Wetlands in drylands.*1987 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetland delineation manual*Dugan, Patrick (editor) (1993) Wetlands in Danger, World Conservation Atlas Series*Brinson, M. (1993) A Hydrogeomorphic Classification of Wetlands*Fredrikson, Leigh H. (1983) Wetlands: A Vanishing Resource Yearbook of Agriculture*W.H. MacKenzie and J.R. Moran (2004) Wetlands of British Columbia: A Guide to Identification. Ministry of Forests, Land Management Handbook 52. http://www.for.gov.bc.ca/hfd/pubs/Docs/Lmh/Lmh52.pdf External links * WetlandInfo: Queensland Department Environment and Natural Resource* US Fish & Wildlife Service: National Wetlands Inventory*  Wetlands: The Ecological Effect of Loss (Research article)* Ple-relais zones humides littorales de la faade atlantique, Manche et Mer du Nord* Marshlands of Iber (in English and Spanish)* Wetlands Water Quality Information Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture* Centro Studi Naturalistici* Wetlands legal updates* Wetland of Hong Kong* Forum des Marais Atlantiques - Ple-relais zones humides littorales de la faade atlantique, Manche et Mer du Nord* Wetlands International - A non-profit global organisation to sustain and restore wetlands, their resources and biodiversity for future generations**Wetlands International Africa**Wetlands International Latin America & the Caribbean**Wetlands International Indonesia **Wetlands International Japan**Ramsar Convention on Wetlandsbn:humidacs:Mokadda:Vdomrdede:Feuchtgebietet:Mrgalael:es:Humedaleo:Malsekejofa:humideko:hi:podrujebasahumidaka:makaylv:Mitrjslt:lapynterletml:lembapnl:Draslandne:ja:no:Vtmarkpl:Mokradomida(zemie)sl:Mokriefi:Kosteikkosv:Vtmarkth:alanngp nczh-yue:zh:
103342
Conservation_in_Australia
Conservation in Australia is an issue of state and federal policy. Australia is one of the most biologically diverse countries in the world, with a large portion of  species endemic to Australia. Preserving this wealth of biodiversity is important for future generations.Animal habitats like reefs and forests must be preserved in order to preserve population and diversity of animal species. Conservation is vital for future study and for field research to be undertaken, and because biological richness is an unmeasurable aesthetic that may be developed into commercial recreational attractions.According to Benyus, the potential for advances in biomimicry in Australia are great because the weather and conditions found here provide an excellent evolutionary incubator. Research on natural processes can only occur if habitat is preserved and organisms continue to thrive.National Park.jpg|thumb|right|320px|Rainforests such as the Daintree have immeasurable value.Federal and State governments manage areas and parks; a number of non-governmental organizations are also involved in conservation.Conservation issuesA key conservation issue is the preservation of biodiversity, especially by protecting the remaining rainforests. The destruction of habitat by human activities, including land clearing, remains the major cause of biodiversity loss in Australia. The importance of the Australian rainforests to the conservation movement is very high. Australia is the only western country to have large areas of rainforest intact.(Our Rainforests and the issues by Beryl Morris, Tondy Sadler and Graham N. Harrington. 1992. CSIRO. ISBN 0-643-05141-4) Forests provide timber, drugs, and food and should be managed to maximize the possible uses. Currently, there are a number of environmental movements and campaigners advocating for action on saving the environment, one such campaign is the Big Switch.(The Big Switch)management issues including clearance of native vegetation, reafforestation of once-cleared areas, control of exotic weeds and pests, expansion of dryland salinity, and changed fire regimes. Intensification of resource use in sectors such as forestry, fisheries, and agriculture are widely reported to contribute to biodiversity loss in Australia. Coastal and marine environments also have reduced biodiversity from reduced water quality caused by pollution and sediments arising from human settlements and agriculture. In central South Wales where there are large plains of grassland, problems have risen fromunusual to saylack of land clearing.Before European settlement, Aborigines burnt the grassland regularly for thousands of years and eventually native animals became dependent on the grasslands and the regular burning. When Europeans settled the area in the early 19th century, their ignorance lead to the destruction of the grassland through lack of regular burning. Thus the grasslands were swallowed up by woody weeds and shrub, degrading the soil, accelerating erosion and reducing the biodiversity.Specific issues:* Island* Dam* Pedder* mining in Kakadu National Park* Plight of the River systemLegal frameworkInternational agreements that affect conservation policy in Australia.Protected areasThere are numerous areas in all States and Territories that have been created to protect and preserve Australias unique ecosystems. Protected areas include national parks and other reserves, as well as 64 wetlands which are registered under the Convention and 16 Heritage Sites. , 10.8% (774,619.51 km) of the total land area of Australia is within a protected area.(Department of the Environment and Heritage. 2002. Summary of Terrestrial Protected Areas in Australia by Type) Protected marine zones have been created in many areas to preserve marine biodiversity; as of 2002 they cover about 7% (646,000 km) of Australias marine jurisdiction.(Department of the Environment and Heritage. 2002. About the National Representative System of Marine Protected Areas (NRSMPA)) thumb|right|250 px|Hopetoun Falls and other unique wilderness areas are protected within reserves and parks.Protected areas of include those managed by the federal Department of the Environment and Heritage, and parks and other protected areas managed by the states, Agencies responsible for protected areas include:*Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority*South Wales Department of Environment and Climate Change*Victoria*Parks and Wildlife Service*Parks and Wildlife South Australia*of Environment and Conservation (Western Australia)*Parks and Wildlife Service*Ministers Department (Australian Capital Territory)*and Wildlife Commission of the Northern TerritoryThreatened speciesConservation organisationsA number of governmental and nongovernmental organizations work in conservation and restoration of the Australian environment.*ASGAP - comprising the Wildflower Society of WA (in WA) & Australian Plants Society (other states)*Conservation Foundation*Koala Foundation*Marine Conservation Society*Wildlife Conservancy*Environmental Foundation*Heritage Australia*Birds Australia*Up Australia*Volunteers Australia*for National Parks & Wildlife*Corps*Australia*Australia*Heritage Trust Australia*Wildlife Information Rescue and Education Service*Ark*Population Australia*Metropolitan Wildlife Service*Wilderness Society*Preservation Society of QueenslandReferencesExternal links*State of the Environment reporting
104807
Pleasant_Grove,_Alabama
Pleasant Grove is a city in County, Alabama and suburb of Birmingham.  It is part of the Metropolitan Area. Its nickname is The Good Neighbor City.  At the 2010 census the population was 10,110. Pleasant Grove is home to Norwood United Football Club (formerly Norwood Clinic F.C.), a semi-professional soccer team.HistoryIt was established in 1889, but incorporated as a city in January 1937. The incorporation came about by reason of a rather unusual circumstance. The town sits on land honeycombed by coal mines. For many years the residents had relied on water wells for their water supply. As years passed and more mining was done, Pleasant Grove found itself confronted with a problem. Residents would sometimes go to their well to draw water only to find there was none. The water had gone into the mines.During the mid to late 30s, the Federal Government had a program for financing the building of local water systems. In exploring the possibility of securing such funds, it was revealed that in order to secure such financing a community must be legally incorporated. At this time the incorporation became a reality.The first appointed Mayor of Pleasant Grove was W.P. Stone. The city is governed by a Mayor and five council members who serve four-year terms. Elections for city officials is held during the summer of each leap year with four year terms beginning the first Monday in October. The area known as Pleasant Grove, Alabama was first homesteaded in September 1836. Pleasant Grove is in Jefferson County. Although no one seems to know when or exactly how the town came by its name, old documents indicate that at least part of this area was called Pleasant Grove as early as 1884. Pleasant Grove was made up of four communities which included Frog Pond, Lizard Ridge, Cottage Hill, and Pleasant Grove.Tornado incidentsIts communities were damaged by an F4 tornado on April 15, 1956, an F5 tornado on April 8, 1998 including Oak Grove High School and an EF4 tornado on April 27, 2011.(http://blog.al.com/spotnews/2011/04/pleasant_grove_tornado_mayor_c.html)GovernmentThe city is governed by a mayor, currently Jerry Brasseale, and five-member council. All city officials are elected to four-year terms on leap years. The council meets the first and third Tuesday of each month at Pleasant Grove City Hall. Council members as of the 2008 election are James Mosely, William Bullion, Terrie Hicks, Philip Houston and Paula Johnson.GeographyPleasant Grove is located at .According to the Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all of it land.Pleasant Grove is home to Milk Creek, named for its creamy-white color and thick, calcious texture.EducationPleasant Grove Schools are operated by the Jefferson County Board of Education. Land was originally given the Board of Education and a gift of $150,000 toward the construction of a Junior High School. In 1970, Pleasant Grove High School was built. It  combined with the Junior High School. The schools were accredited by the State of Alabama in May 1973. It agreed to give the Board of Education $1,000,000.00 over a ten year period to add onto the existing Elementary School and get all of the children K-6 under one roof. In January 1997, students who formerly attended Woodward School were relocated in this city.Construction of a new Pleasant Grove High School was completed in 2010.(http://www.al.com/news/birminghamnews/west.ssf?/base/community/1239783496156670.xml&coll2)  The old high school is now Pleasant Grove Middle School.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 9,983 people, 3,570 households, and 2,909 families residing in the city. The density was 1,129.9 people per square mile (436.0/km). There were 3,717 housing units at an average density of 420.7 per square mile (162.3/km). The racial makeup of the city was 84.67% White, 14.44% Black or African American, 0.19% Native American, 0.15% Asian, 0.16% from other races, and 0.38% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.28% of the population.There were 3,570 households out of which 37.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 70.7% were married couples living together, 8.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 18.5% were non-families. 17.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.72 and the average family size was 3.08.In the city the population was spread out with 24.4% under the age of 18, 7.1% from 18 to 24, 27.0% from 25 to 44, 25.6% from 45 to 64, and 15.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 90.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.6 males.The median income for a household in the city was $52,776, and the median income for a family was $59,132. Males had a median income of $38,544 versus $28,519 for females. The capita income for the city was $20,774. About 3.2% of families and 3.8% of the population were below the line, including 4.2% of those under age 18 and 4.4% of those age 65 or over.Norwood United Football ClubNorwood United Football Club (formerly Norwood Clinic F.C.) is a semi-professional soccer team that competes in the Birmingham United Soccer Association Champions League.  While NUFC competed in CAISL, home games were played at the Pleasant Grove Athletic Complex.  Since moving to the Champions League, all home games are played at either Heardmont Park or Sports Blast on 280.  Under the management of Chris Hendrix, NUFC has won two league championships and competed in the Alabama Sports Festival, where they notched a famous tie with Bullets F.C. when veteran stopper Andrew Pitts saved a last minute penalty kick.(http://www.birminghamunited.com/schedules/Spring2011/33960455.html) Notable residents*Johnson (baseball), League Baseball Pitcher for the Rockies Organization.*Phillips (fishing), Television Host of with Archie Phillips.*G. Armstrong*Kevin Smith (musician), Former guitarist of the band Reason*Chris Dow (musician), Current lead vocalist of the band Reason References(External links*City websiteGrove (Alabama)Grove (Alabama)Grove (Alabama)Grove, AlabamaGrove, AlabamaGrove (Alabama)Grove (Alabama)Grove (Alabama)Grove (Alabama)Grove, AlabamaGrove (Alabama)
105234
Aniak,_Alaska
footnotes                 Aniak (Anyaraq in Central Yupik) is a city in the Bethel Census Area in the U.S. state of Alaska. At the 2000 census the population was 572.Geography (61.578821, -159.550255).Aniak is located on the south bank of the River at the head of Aniak Slough,  southwest of Russian Mission in the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta. It lies  northeast of Bethel and  west of Anchorage.According to the States Census Bureau, the city of has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (25.82%) is water.Climate is maritime in the summer and continental in winter. Temperatures range between -55 and 87. Average yearly precipitation is , with snowfall of .DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 572 people, 174 households, and 133 families residing in the city.  The population density was 87.8 people per square mile (33.9/km).  There were 203 housing units at an average density of 31.1 per square mile (12.0/km).  The racial makeup of the city was 25.00% White, 0.35% Black or African American, 68.36% Native American, 0.52% Asian, and 5.77% from two or more races.  1.05% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 174 households out of which 51.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.9% were married couples living together, 13.2% had a female householder with 0 husbands present, and 23.0% were non-families. 20.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 4.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 3.29 and the average family size was 3.74.In the city the age distribution of the population shows 40.9% under the age of 18, 6.8% from 18 to 24, 27.3% from 25 to 44, 20.3% from 45 to 64, and 4.7% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 28 years. For every 100 females there were 108.8 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 107.4 males.The median income for a household in the city was $41,875, and the median income for a family was $43,750. Males had a median income of $37,708 versus $34,500 for females. The capita income for the city was $16,550.  About 11.8% of families and 14.0% of the population were below the line, including 13.4% of those under age 18 and 12.5% of those age 65 or over. History thumb|right|200px|Shoreline of the Kuskokwim River at AniakAniak was the Yupik name for the area around present-day Aniak. The word means the place where it comes out; that is, where the River flows into the Kuskokwim. By the time Russian explorers began making contact with the native population along the mid Kuskokwim valley in the early 19th century, the native village of Aniak had been deserted.It was believed by 20th century prospectors that the early Russian traders discovered gold in a tributary to the Kuskokwim called Yellow River in 1832. Many think that the Yellow River these traders referred to is the Aniak River.(Brown, Charles M. Alaskas Kuskokwim River Region. Bureau of Land Management. Anchorage, Alaska: Bureau of Land Management, State Office, 1983. 101.) A mercury deposit was discovered by Russian traders near the trading post called Redoubt  east of Aniak in 1838.(Spurr, J.E., 1900, A reconnaissance in southwestern Alaska in 1898: U.S. Geological Survey 20th Annual Report, Part 7, p. 31-264.) Placer gold was found by Russian traders in New York Creek  east of Aniak in 1844.(Berry, M.J., 1973, A history of mining on the Kenai Peninsula: Seattle, Washington, Alaska Northwest Publishing Company, 214 p.) The Russians however did not engage in any significant mining activities and it wasnt until after the purchase of Alaska in 1867 that the American prospectors began seriously investigating the potential for prospecting along the Kuskokwim river. A handful of prospecting parties began venturing into the area, however they had to travel great distances to an area where trading posts were few and far between, so the activity was limited especially given the exposure of other late 19th century strikes in Alaska which were better served by existing infrastructure.The euphoria caused by the Gold Rush in 1897-98 would set the stage for a change however with thousands of prospectors across the territory poised to make a rush upon rumor of each potential new strike. One such rush was the Yellow River Stampede of 1900 in which many prospectors left Nome to venture into the Kuskokwim basin upon rumors that someone had found the Yellow River strike despite the fact that the location of that strike was unknown. Finding precious little gold and experiencing substantial hardship, many of these folks would return to Nome following the difficult winter of 1901, but some stayed behind to continue their search. A 1906 gold discovery at the head of the River which is a tributary to the River caused another gold rush in 1907 with many of the prospectors choosing to access the site via the Kuskokwim River instead and trading posts were established at the River which required riverboat service to travel the Kuskokwim river. With riverboat service now available on the Kukskokwim river, prospecting activity picked up and some strikes were starting to occur in the Kuskokwim basin. Strikes were made at Crooked Creek, George River, New York Creek, and Aniak River among others. Most were short lived, however, the Kuskokwim River was now seeing an increase in river traffic that needed servicing.In 1910, a lone prospector named Old Man Keeler reportedly found placer gold in the Aniak River basin. In 1911, three prospectors, Harry Buhro, E. W. Kid Fisher, and Fred Labelle, who had been working the George River area decided to give the Aniak River basin area a try and discovered gold at Marvel, Fisher and Dome creeks.(Maddren, A.G., Iditarod Pioneer. US Geological Survey Bulletin 622. 1911. p. 301.) These creeks feed into the Aniak River about  south of Aniak. Initially prospectors would reach this site by poling up the river in boats, however that was a difficult journey due to the nature of the river. The trip would take 15 to 20 days from the Kuskokwim river. By 1913, a hydraulic plant had been installed at Marvel Creek and in 1914 construction of a  cat trail began starting  south of Aniak on the mouth of the Aniak Slough and proceeding to the diggings at Marvel Creek. The cat trail was last used in the spring of 2006 by miners still working claims. This same year, Tom L. Johnson homesteaded the site of the long-abandoned Yupik village in the Aniak area and opened a store and post office there to service prospectors and miners in the vicinity. Willie Pete and Sam Simeon brought their Yupik families from Ohagamiut to Aniak. In 1936 a territorial school was opened. In anticipation of the Lend-Lease program to help supply Russia with war materials, construction of an airfield began in 1939. With the airfield in place, Aniak became the transportation hub for villages in the area including Chuathbaluk, Anvik, Kalskag, Crooked Creek, Holy Cross and others. In 1956 during the War, construction of a White Alice Relay Station began bringing money, jobs, and communication capability to the area. The impact to the community from the relay station was immediate as the first telephone capable of long distance phone calls was installed at the Aniak Lodge in 1957 and Aniaks population more than doubled from 142 in 1950 to 308 in 1960. The 2000 census places Aniaks population at 572. Notes (ca:Aniak(Alaska)fr:Aniak(Alaska)mrj:nl:Aniak(Alasca)Alaskafi:Aniakvo:Aniak
105518
Iliamna,_Alaska
Iliamna is a place (CDP) in Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska,  States.  The population was 102 at the 2000 census.GeographyIliamna is located at  (59.765135, -154.840312).Present-day Iliamna is located on the northwest side of Lake in southwest Alaska.According to the States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (1.67%) is water.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 102 people, 35 households, and 26 families residing in the CDP. The density was 2.8 people per square mile (1.1/km). There were 58 housing units at an average density of 1.6/sq mi (0.6/km). The racial makeup of the CDP was 39.22% White, 50.00% Native American, and 10.78% from two or more races. There were 35 households out of which 45.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.9% were married couples living together, 5.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.7% were non-families. 20.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 2.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.91 and the average family size was 3.42.In the CDP the population was spread out with 34.3% under the age of 18, 6.9% from 18 to 24, 28.4% from 25 to 44, 28.4% from 45 to 64, and 2.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females there were 112.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 103.0 males.The median income for a household in the CDP was $60,625, and the median income for a family was $61,250. Males had a median income of $38,333 versus $36,667 for females. The capita income for the CDP was $19,741. There were no families and 3.1% of the population living below the line, including no under eighteens and none of those over 64.History & PresentIliamna was originally the name of an Athabaskan village at the point where the River flows into Lake, about  from present-day Iliamna. That site is now called Old Iliamna. In 1935, the residents of Old Iliamna moved to the present-day location.The first sport fishing lodge in Iliamna was built in the 1930s and the second was built in the 1950s. Many more were built in the later 1900s. Iliamnas economy has two main elements: subsistence fishing and hunting and sport fishing lodges. Year-round residents largely pursue subsistence activities while summer workers from other areas work in the lodges.At present, Iliamna faces the prospect of developing into a mining town, as several multi-national companies have plans to develop the area north west of the village into one of North Americas largest gold-copper-molybdenum mines.  The first company to submit plans to the of Alaska is Dynasty, a wholly owned subsidiary of Dickenson.  The and Peninsula Borough, the governing body for the region, passed a strong resolution in support of the development of the mine, but the majority of the surrounding villages adamantly oppose the development.  Two non-profit organizations are heading up the fight against open-pit mining in the Bristol Bay watershed - the Bay Alliance and the Resources Coalition.  A study concluded in 2006 indicated that the majority of Alaskans were opposed to the development.References(External links* Bristol Bay Alliance* Renewable Resources Coalition* http://library.state.ak.us/asp/edocs/2007/04/ocm71155611.pdf  Subsistence harvests and uses of wild resources in Iliamna, Newhalen, Nondalton, Pedro Bay, and Port Alsworth, Alaska, 2004 / by James A. Fall ... al.. Hosted by Alaska State Publications Programca:Iliamna(Alaska)mrj:nl:Iliamna(Alasca)vo:Iliamna
105590
Deering,_Alaska
footnotes                 Deering (Ipnatchiaq in Iupiaq) is a city in the Northwest Arctic Borough in the U.S. state of Alaska. It is located on a sandy spit on the Peninsula where the River flows into Sound,  southwest of Kotzebue.  As of the 2000 census, the population was 136. , the village includes a community hall, a clinic run by the U.S. Public Health Service, a post office, a church, two stores, and a National Guard armory.CultureThe inhabitants are primarily Iupiat Eskimo. The people are active in subsistence. The sale or importation of alcohol is banned in the village.HistoryThe village was established in 1901 as a supply station for interior gold mining near the historic Malemiut Eskimo village of Inmachukmiut. The name probably comes from the schooner Abbie M. Deering, which was present in the area at that time; see Abbie M. Deering. Deering incorporated as a second-class city in 1970. It also has a village council, organized under the Reorganization Act of 1934.GeographyDeering is located at  (66.075713, -162.718229).According to the States Census Bureau, the village has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (2.28%) is water.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 136 people, 42 households, and 28 families residing in the village. The population density was 26.5 people per square mile (10.2/km). There were 61 housing units at an average density of 11.9 per square mile (4.6/km). The racial makeup of the city was 93.38% Native American (Iupiat), 5.88% White, and 0.74% from two or more races.There were 42 households out of which 40.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 21.4% were married couples living together, 33.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.0% were non-families. 23.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 2.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.24 and the average family size was 3.90.In the village the age distribution of the population shows 39.7% under the age of 18, 6.6% from 18 to 24, 28.7% from 25 to 44, 17.6% from 45 to 64, and 7.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 27 years. For every 100 females there were 109.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 115.8 males.The median income for a household in the village was $33,333, and the median income for a family was $43,438. Males had a median income of $26,875 versus $25,625 for females. The capita income for the village was $11,000. None of the families but 5.8% of the population were below the line. No one under the age of 18 or over 64 were living below the poverty line.The Abbie M. DeeringA first-hand account written by Captain James D. Winchester and published in 1900 tells that the Abbie M. Deering was bought by a company of twenty men who wanted to sail to the Alaskan Gold Fields during the Gold Rush. They left Massachusetts in November 1897, passed through the Straits of Magellan, and arrived at San Francisco five months later, where they sold the ship. Records kept by the Management Service of the Department of the Interior show the schooner did make it to Alaska, where it was lost in the Islands in September 1903.Kiplings 1897 novel Courageous mentions the Abbie M. Deering by name.References(External links*Maniilaq Association web page for Deering(Alaska)(Alaska)(Alaska)ik:Ipnatchiaq(Alaska)mrj:(Alaska)(Alasca)Alaska(Alaska)Alaska(Alaska)
105678
Gakona,_Alaska
Gakona () (Ggax Kuna in Ahtna) is a place (CDP) in the Valdez-Cordova Census Area in the state of Alaska. As of the 2000 census, the population of the CDP was 215.Geography and climateGakona is located at  (62.301940, -145.30194) (Sec. 18, T006N, R001E, Copper River Meridian). Gakona is located in the Chitina Recording District.Gakona is located in the center of Copper Valley, surrounded by mountains and the famous Copper River. Gakona is at the confluence of the Copper and Gakona Rivers, 15 miles northeast of Glennallen. It lies at mile 2 on the Cut-Off to the Highway, just east of the Highway. Gakona is located in the continental climate zone, with long, cold winters and relatively warm summers. Temperature extremes have been recorded from -62 to 91. Snowfall averages 61 inches, with total precipitation of 13 inches per year.According to the States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all of it land.History and cultureAhtna Athabascans have lived in the Copper River basin for 5,000 to 7,000 years. Gakona served as a wood and fish camp, and later became a permanent village. A federally recognised tribe, the Native Village of Gakona, is located in the community.In 1904 Doyles Roadhouse was constructed at the junction of the Valdez-Eagle and Valdez-Fairbanks Trails, and became an essential stopping point for travelers. There was also a post office, stagecoach station and blacksmith shop here. Some buildings are still standing. Gakona Lodge was built in 1929 by Arne N Sundt and was operated by Henra Sundt until 1976 when she sold it to the Strang family. Originally from Norway, Sundt purchased the old roadhouse and property from the Slate Creek Mining Company in about 1926. Sundt was a director of the Nabesna Mining Company. The lodge is on the National Register of Historical Places. It contains 10 rooms in the lodge, 4 cabins, and restaurant and tavern.  It is presently a popular destination for sports fishing particularly King and Sockeye Salmon. http://www.gakonalodge.comDemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 215 people, 84 households, and 60 families residing in the CDP.  The density was 3.5 people per square mile (1.4/km).  There were 90 housing units at an average density of 1.5/sq mi (0.6/km).  The racial makeup of the CDP was 75.35% White, 12.09% Native American, 1.86% from other races, and 10.70% from two or more races.  1.40% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 84 households out of which 35.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.9% were married couples living together, 3.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.4% were non-families. 22.6% of all households were made up of individuals and 3.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 3.02.In the CDP the population was spread out with 28.8% under the age of 18, 3.7% from 18 to 24, 27.4% from 25 to 44, 31.6% from 45 to 64, and 8.4% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 133.7 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 131.8 males.The median income for a household in the CDP was $33,750, and the median income for a family was $44,375. Males had a median income of $41,250 versus $46,875 for females. The capita income for the CDP was $18,143.  About 9.4% of families and 10.8% of the population were below the line, including 3.4% of those under the age of eighteen and 10.5% of those sixty five or over.Public servicesGroceries,  limited hardware, local clothing, limited sporting goods, and ice are available at the trading post. Salmon fishing and river rafting are popular recreational activities.All residences have individual wells and septic systems and complete plumbing. The school uses its own well water system . Funds have been requested to construct a new water well and storage tank for a HUD housing complex. Refuse collection services are available from Copper Basin Sanitation, which hauls waste to the Glennallen landfill. Electricity is provided by Copper Valley Electric Assoc. There is one school located in the community, attended by 17 students (as of 2008 Gakona school was shut down due to lack of students). Local hospitals or health clinics include Gakona Health Clinic and the Cross Road Medical Center in Glennallen (about 30 miles away).  Gakona is classified as an isolated village; it is found in EMS Region 2E in the Copper River Region. Emergency Services have highway and air access, and are within 30 minutes of a higher-level satellite health care facility. Emergency service is provided by 911 Telephone Service and volunteers, while auxiliary health care is provided by Copper River EMS, Gulkana Clinic, and the Cross Road Medical Center in Glennallen. Economy and transportation Gakona depends upon local businesses and seasonal tourist travel. There is a Historic Lodge (National Register of Historic Places) called Lodge and Trading Post that has rooms, a restaurant, cabins and tavern. Gakona sawmill and dog sled maker. Summers provide income for local fishing and hunting guides, rafting operations and outfitters. Three residents currently hold commercial fishing permits. River Wrangellers was the first of these companies to obtain a commercial fishing permit and was a pioneer in the Gakona Rafting Industry. It provided the necessary publicity for the burgeoning rafting industry and brought many tourists to the area. River Wrangellers was founded by Kevin and Suzanne McCarthy and named after the WrangellSt. Elias National Park (the largest National Park in North America). Suzanne McCarthy is the local geologist guru of the Copper River Basin and currently runs William Sound Community College. Suzannes geological expertise allowed River Wrangellers to provide not only a world class rafting experience but also a unique insight into the local geology, ecosystems and history. River Wrangellers was sold in 2006 but still operates in the Gakona region.      Gakona is located adjacent the Copper, Gakona and Gulkana Rivers allowing access to world class King Salmon, Sockeye Salmon and Rainbow Trout fishing.  Some residents rely on subsistence activities and trapping. Recording equipment for the High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP) is located near Gakona.  The Glenn Highway/Tok Cut-Off and Richardson Highway provide access to the Anchorage, Fairbanks and the 48. A 5,000 paved runway is available at nearby Gulkana.ReferencesExternal linksca:Gakona(Alaska)(Alaska)(Alaska)mrj:nl:Gakonapt:Gakonavo:Gakona
105748
McGrath,_Alaska
footnotes                 McGrath (Tochak in Upper Kuskokwim, Digenegh(ankn.uaf.edu: Deg Xinag Aixi Nielyoy / Deg Xinag Learners Dictionary (2007)) in Deg Xinag) is a village in on the River in Alaska, United States.  The population was 401 at the 2000 census. Despite its small population, the village is an important transportation and economic hub for the area. History The Old Town McGrath site, across the river from present-day McGrath, was a meeting and trading place for Big River, Nikolai, Telida, and Lake Minchumina villagers.In 1904, Abraham Appel established a trading post in Old Town. In 1906, gold was discovered in the Innoko District, and in 1907, and at Ganes Creek. Since McGrath was the northernmost point on the Kuskokwim River accessible by large riverboats, it became a regional supply center. A town was established at the site of Old McGrath in 1907, and was named for Peter McGrath, a local United States Marshal. The Trail also contributed to McGraths role as a supply center. From 1911 to 1920, hundreds of people walked and mushed over the trail on their way to the Ophir gold districts. Mining sharply declined after 1925.After a major flood in 1933, some residents moved across the river. Changes in the course of the river eventually left the old site on a slough, making it useless as a river stop. In 1940, an airstrip was cleared, the United States Federal Aviation Administration built a communications complex, and a school was opened. McGrath became an important refueling stop for Lend-Lease equipment during World War II.GeographyMcGrath is located on the south bank of the River in western Alaska.According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (10.48%) is water.Demographicsfootnotesource:()As of the census of 2000, there were 401 people, 145 households, and 99 families residing in the city.  The population density was 8.2 people per square mile (3.2/km).  There were 213 housing units at an average density of 4.4 per square mile (1.7/km).  The racial makeup of the city was 42.64% White, 43.89% Native American, 0.75% Asian, 0.75% from other races, and 11.97% from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.00% of the population.There were 145 households out of which 42.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.5% were married couples living together, 11.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.7% were non-families. 26.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 4.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.77 and the average family size was 3.34.In the city the age distribution of the population shows 35.9% under the age of 18, 8.5% from 18 to 24, 24.7% from 25 to 44, 25.9% from 45 to 64, and 5.0% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females there were 104.6 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 107.3 males.The median income for a household in the city was $43,056, and the median income for a family was $44,167. Males had a median income of $41,875 versus $41,389 for females. The capita income for the city was $21,553.  About 8.7% of families and 9.8% of the population were below the line, including 10.8% of those under age 18 and 17.4% of those age 65 or over.References((Alaska)(Alaska)()(Alaska)(Alasca)fi:McGrath
106574
Bisbee,_Arizona
footnotes                Bisbee is a city in County, Arizona, United States, 82 miles (132 km) southeast of Tucson. According to 2005 Census Bureau estimates, the population of the city was 6,177.() The city is the seat of Cochise County.HistoryBisbee was founded as a copper, gold, and silver town in 1880, and named in honor of Judge DeWitt Bisbee, one of the financial backers of the adjacent Queen Mine.In 1929, the seat was moved from Arizona, to Bisbee, where it remains.A syndicated series which aired from 19561958, of Cochise starring Bromfield, was filmed in Bisbee.Mining industryFile:Azurite-velvet-beauty.jpg|thumb|left|Classic azurite mineral specimen from the Bisbee mines, collected circa 1890Mining in the Mountains proved quite successful: in the early 20th century the population of Bisbee soared. Incorporated in 1902, by 1910 its population swelled to 9,019 and it sported a constellation of suburbs, including Warren, Lowell, and San Jose, some of which had been founded on their own (ultimately less successful) mines. In 1917, open pit mining was successfully introduced to meet the heavy copper demand due to World War I.High quality turquoise was a by-product of the copper mining and has been promoted as Blue. Bisbee is noted for the astounding variety of copper-based minerals and the superb specimens that have been taken from its mines.  Bisbee specimens can be found in museums worldwide. Cuprite, aragonite, wulfenite, malachite, azurite, and galena are just a few of the myriad variety of minerals that have been found underneath the town.Bisbee deportation:For full article see: DeportationIn 1917, the Dodge Corporation shipped more than 1,000 striking miners out of the town, because they were believed to be members of the Workers of the World and the company was trying to prevent unionization.(http://www.library.arizona.edu/exhibits/bisbee/index.html The Bisbee Deportation of 1917 at the of Arizona.) They were transported to New Mexico. Earlier in that year of national labor unrest, in central Arizona, the Deportation took place.Mining decline and closureBy 1950, boom times were over and the population of the City of Bisbee had dropped to less than 6,000, but the introduction of mining and continued underground work would see the town escape the fate of many of its early contemporaries. However, in 1975 the Dodge Corporation finally halted its Bisbee copper-mining operations. The resulting exodus of mine employees might have been the end of the town. Phelps Dodge Corporation closed the Bisbee underground mines in the summer of 1975. Bisbee Mayor Chuck Eads, with the generous cooperation of Phelps Dodge, brought to reality the idea of opening a mine tour through a portion of the world-famous Copper Queen Mine. Mayor Eads felt that history of mining should be kept alive in Bisbee and in a manner that would attract tourists to the community. Many faithful volunteers cleared thousands of tons of fallen rock and re-timbered the old workings. They were assisted by local individuals and groups who furnished support and food for the workers. The local effort came to the attention of a federal agency, the Economic Development Administration, which approved a large grant to the City of Bisbee to help the mine tour project and other improvements in downtown Bisbee designed to aid the tourist business.The Queen Mine Tour was officially opened to visitors on February 1, 1976. Since then, more than a million visitors, from all 50 states and more than 30 foreign countries, have enjoyed the ride into the mountain on the underground mine tour train. Bisbee survived and remains as the county seat.Modern BisbeeThe sudden flood of real estate onto the market and crash in housing prices, coupled with an attractive climate and picturesque scenery, led to Bisbees subsequent rebirth as an colony in the early 1970s. Chief among the visionaries who turned the ailing mining town into the tourist destination it later became, were three men who saw Bisbees potential during this time of exodus. Artist Stephen Hutchison and his wife, Marcia, purchased the towns anchor business and architectural gem, The Copper Queen Hotel, from the Phelps-Dodge mining company in 1970 after the company had failed to find a local buyer. The deed to the hotel had been offered to any local resident for the sum of $1.00, with no success. Hutchison purchased and renovated the hotel, as well as other buildings in the downtown, which included a turn of the century Brewery and Stock Exchange. Hutchison began to actively market Bisbee as a destination where travelers could find the authentic, old southwest, complete with aging long-term hotel residents who would recount their experiences from their easy chairs on the vast hotel front porch. Hutchisons endeavors attracted another dynamic personality, developer Ed Smart, the second figure in Bisbees 70s revitalization triumvirate. Among the many guests at the hotel were celebrities from nearby California. Wayne was a frequent visitor to Bisbee and The Copper Queen. He befriended Hutchison and eventually partnered with Smart in his real estate ventures, completing the triumvirate.  This period of Bisbees history is well documented in contemporary articles in New Yorker and in an article by Trillin in Cornell Review. It was at this time that Bisbee became a haven for artists and hippies fleeing the larger cities of Arizona and California and, later, the increasing gentrification of  places like Colorado.The rediscovery of Bisbee by boomers in the 1990s saw it develop a more polished look, complete with coffee shops and live theater. Many of the old houses have been renovated, and property values in Bisbee now greatly exceed those of other Southeastern Arizona cities.Today, the original city of Bisbee is known as Old Bisbee, and is home to a thriving downtown cultural scene. Old Bisbee is also noted for its architecture, including its Victorian style houses and elegant Deco courthouse. Because its plan was laid out before the automobile, Old Bisbee has an almost European feel. The towns hilly terrain is exemplified by the old four-story high school: each floor has a ground-level entrance.QuirkyIn the MayJune 2000 issue of Maturity, the AARP highlighted what they called the most alive places to retire in the U.S.  Bisbee was a runner-up as one of the quirkiest towns in America.(International Real Estate Digest. Retrieved 2010-03-12.)Gay CommunityBisbee is noted for its gay-friendliness,(Sierra Vista Herald Bisbee Pride Festival organizers say they have put city on the map June 09, 2008.)(Purple Roofs - Your GLBT guide to World Travel. Retrieved 2010-03-12.) and its Pride Days is considered one of the top 5 rural Gay Prides in the United States by the online site at gay.com. Bisbee gays have their own website at bisbeepride.com.The 2008 Bisbee Gay Pride celebrations included a Leather and Lace Street Party, poolside BBQ, a lingerie pub crawl, the Bert Lundy Dance Party, and a turn-of-the-century ball.(Gay News.) Ten U.S. AIDS Memorial Quilt panels were on display at Bisbees famed Queen Hotel.(Copper Queen Hotel homepage. Retrieved 2010-03-12.)SuburbsFile:Cochise County Courthouse Bisbee Arizona ArtDecoDoors.jpg|thumb|250px|right|Deco doors on the Cochise County Courthouse.The city of Bisbee now includes the historic downtown Bisbee, as well as the geographically spaced but administratively combined satellite communities of Warren, Lowell, and San Jose. The Lowell and Warren townsites were founded around their own mining subdivisions before being purchased in large part by Phelps Dodge and then consolidated into Bisbee-proper during the early part of the twentieth century. There are also smaller neighborhoods interspersed between these larger boroughs including Galena, Bakerville, Tintown, South Bisbee, Briggs and Saginaw.Warren has the distinction of being Arizonas first community. Although there were mines operating in the vicinity, it was primarily designed as a bedroom community for the more affluent citizens of the mining district. The centrally located Vista Park and its adjacent downtown area at one time comprised a thriving center of commerce. Warren boasts a fine collection of Arts and Crafts style bungalow houses, many of which are historically registered and can be visited by the public during the citys annual home tour. Since the exit of mining in the 1970s, Warren has seen a steady decline in its standard of living, but its residential district still houses a significant portion of the population and it boasts ownership of many public services including City Hall, Greenway Elementary School, Bisbee High School, and the historic Ballpark.Lowell was at one time a sizable mining town located just to the southeast of Old Bisbee. The majority of the original townsite was consumed by the excavation of the Lavender Pit mine during the 1950s. All that is left today is a small portion of Erie Street, along with Evergreen Cemetery, Saginaw subdivision and Lowell Middle School. These days Lowell is considered by most of the local residents to be more of a place name than an actual community.San Jose, on the southern side of the Mountains, is the most modern of the citys subdivisions, and has seen the most new growth in the last two decades as it is not restricted by mountains. Named after a nearby Mexican mountain peak, it hosts many newer county government buildings, Huachuca Terrace Elementary School, and a large shopping center.Resurgence of mining industryIn 2007, in what has been noted as the worlds biggest-ever mining takeover,  Freeport-McMoRan Copper & Gold bought  Phelps Dodge Mining(Bloomberg News. Retrieved 2010-03-12.) and has begun some preliminary work in the area.Special eventsThe Bisbee 1000 Stair Climb is a five kilometer run through Bisbee that goes up and down 1,034 stairs. Because much of Old Bisbee is built in the hills of the Mountains, many of the houses cant be reached by car. Billed as The most unique physical fitness challenge in the USA! by the organizers,(Bisbee 1000 Stairs site. Retrieved 2010-03-12.) it includes being serenaded by musicians at various locations among the stairs. The event has grown to include the Ice Man Competition, designed to honor the history of men delivering blocks of ice by hand before the advent of refrigeration. In the Ice Man Competition, entrants race up 155 steps carrying a ten-pound block of ice with antique ice tongs.Naco and Bisbee JunctionArizona is a small unincorporated border community some three miles south of the San Jose district of Bisbee. It straddles the  United States border and is home to an official port of entry. Naco features a U.S. Post Office, an school, and several businesses, including a small store, garage, and saloon.Bisbee Junction (formerly Osborn or Osborn Junction) is located four miles south of Warren. It was originally a railroad siding where ore trains from the Bisbee mines joined with the main Southern Pacific rail line. A Southern Pacific depot and U.S. Post Office building in the style of the first half of the 20th century originally stood at the railroad junction, but it was closed in the late 1950s and eventually razed soon afterward. A dance hall, an Elks club and small goods store were once located near the depot, and the settlement was once home to several cattle ranches and dairies. The Cactus Botanical Garden was located in Bisbee Junction.GeographyBisbee is located at  (31.418390, -109.897772).According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all of it land.ClimateDemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 6,090 people, 2,810 households, and 1,503 families residing in the city. The population density was 1,266.3 people per square mile (488.8/km). There were 3,316 housing units at an average density of 689.5 per square mile (266.2/km). The racial makeup of the city was 84.12% White, 0.46% Black or African American, 1.22% Native American, 0.49% Asian, 0.07% Pacific Islander, 11.07% from other races, and 2.58% from two or more races. 34.38% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 2,810 households out of which 21.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 36.8% were married couples living together, 12.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 46.5% were non-families. 39.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 14.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.15 and the average family size was 2.90.In the city the age distribution of the population shows 21.6% under the age of 18, 6.8% from 18 to 24, 24.1% from 25 to 44, 27.8% from 45 to 64, and 19.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females there were 90.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.1 males.The median income for a household in the city was $27,942, and the median income for a family was $36,685. Males had a median income of $29,573 versus $23,269 for females. The capita income for the city was $17,129. About 12.9% of families and 17.5% of the population were below the line, including 23.2% of those under age 18 and 9.0% of those age 65 or over.GovernmentBisbee is governed via the mayor-council system. The city council consists of six members who are elected from wards. Each ward elects two members, The mayor is elected in a citywide vote.Sites of interest(excluding those mentioned under History)*Municipal Airport*County Courthouse is built in the art deco style.*Queen Mine was once a major copper producer and can be toured daily.*Dodge General Office Building, a Historic Landmark, now the Bisbee Mining & Historical Museum.*The Pit is an inactive open pit mine site in the center of the city.*The Ballpark, a baseball stadium built in 1909, has housed a number of professional teams and may be baseballs oldest park still in use.*The Ranch, a family-owned and operated beef cattle ranch since 1902, the year Bisbee was incorporated.*The Central School, built in 1905, was once an elementary school and now functions as an art center.Image:Cochise_County_courthouse,_Bisbee,_Arizona.jpg|Cochise County CourthouseImage:CopperQueenMineTour.jpg|Copper Queen Mine TourImage:BisbeeMiningandHistoricalMuseum.jpg|Bisbee Mining & Historical MuseumImage:The Lavender Pit, Bisbee, AZ.jpg|The Lavender PitImage:Copper Queen Hotel, Bisbee AZ.jpg|Copper Queen HotelImage:Evergreen Cementery Bisbee.jpg|Evergreen CemeteryFile:Bisbee, Arizona 1990.jpg|Downtown Bisbee, 1990 Sports teams *Professional: Copper Kings (19281955) (2003) Baseball*Semi-Professional:  Kings (2006-) BaseballPopular cultureLiterature*Brady is the protagonist of a series of mystery novels by author A. Jance, centered on Bisbee and surrounding desert-mountain-border areas.*It is one of the towns robbed by the Butcher Bandit in Cusslers 2007 novel, The Chase.Film* In 2000, the low-budget Shatner film Groom Lake was filmed in and around Bisbee, using many local residents as extras.* In the 1990 film Guns II, the New York City classroom from which Pinkteron agents drag reformed outlaw Scurlock (Sutherland) is actually in Bisbees historic district.* Stephen Kings Desperation was primarily filmed in Bisbee, in the nearly deserted Lowell borough, with other sequences in Old Bisbee, the outskirts of Bisbee and Tucson, Arizona.* Bisbee is featured in the 1957 film 3:10 to Yuma and its 2007 remake.* In the double-Oscar winning 1997 film L.A. Confidential, actress Basinger plays Lynn Bracken, a Lake look-a-like beauty originally from Bisbee.* In the movie Encounters of the Third Kind, one of the previously alien-abducted characters who was returned to earth at Devils Tower is identified as John DeLorean, Bisbee, Arizona.* The 1955 movie Saturday, with Mature and Marvin, was filmed in and around Bisbee, and shows many scenes of downtown Bisbee.Music* The song Bisbee Blue was included on the 2006 Calexico album, Ruin.Television*The 1956-1958 TV series of Cochise was set in and around Bisbee, legal seat of Cochise County.(Plot Summary for Sheriff of Cochise at IMDB.com. Retrieved 2010-03-12.)Notable residents* Dawson - NFL player.* Frye  martial arts fighter. He was fired from the Bisbee Fire Department after winning an early Fighting Championship event, 8, due to the negative stigma surrounding mixed martial arts.()* Hartley  author, blogger and game designer for Wolf Games.* Hindman  actor best known for portraying W. Wilson Jr. on the sitcom Home Improvement, was born in Bisbee in 1942.* Kiyosaki  Self-help author, investor, businessman.  Wrote Rich Dad Poor Dad at his ranch in Bisbee after his retirement in 1994.* Katie Lee  singer and writer. She made a Godiva-style bicycle ride through downtown Bisbee.(Katie Lee, 2004, Sandstone Seduction.)* Richard Shelton  author.* Stanhope  comedian.* Williamson  science fiction writer, born April 29, 1908 in Bisbee.* Peter Young  artist.* Paul Newman  Current Arizona Corporation Commissioner, former State Representative, former Cochise County Supervisor.* Thornton  writer.See also* Mountains* Pit* Railway* * International Airport* Arizona Bird Observatory* Cactus Botanical GardenReferencesFurther reading* Martinelli, Phylis Cancilla. Undermining Race: Ethnic Identities in Arizona Copper Camps, 18801920 (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2009). xii, 225 pp. isbn 978-0-8165-2745-8External links*City of Bisbee*Chamber of Commerce*Community Profile by Arizona Department of Commerce*Sierra Vista Herald/Bisbee Daily Review (newspaper)*The Bisbee Observer (newspaper)bg:(Arizona)(Arizona)(Arizona)(Arizona)ArizonaArizona(Arizona)(Arizona)(Arizona)Arizona(Arizona)()
106669
Bullhead_City,_Arizona
website                   http://www.bullheadcity.com/Bullhead City is a city located on the Colorado River in Mohave County, Arizona, USA, roughly  south of Las Vegas, Nevada, and directly across the River from Nevada, whose casinos and ancillary services supply much of the employment for Bullhead City.  Bullhead City is located on the southern border of Mohave.According to 2006 Census Bureau estimates, the population of the city is 40,225.()  The nearby communities of Laughlin, Needles, Mohave, and Mohave Valley bring the Bullhead areas total population to about 100,000, making it the largest micropolitan area in Mohave County.(http://www.bullheadazeda.com/)(http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/04/04015.html)  The latest figures indicate that ...more than 115,000 people flew in to Laughlin/Bullhead International Airport on casino-sponsored charters in 2010. That number is likely to be higher in 2011.(http://www.bullheadcity.com/index.asp?TypeB_LIST&SEC{0B21B529-F6E0-45E8-AA7D-C2F3E983BE1C})With over 45 sq. miles, Bullhead City is the largest city in Mohave County in terms of total land area.(http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/04/0408220.html)In 2011, the International Airport was named Airport of the Year by the Department of Transportation.(http://laughlinbullheadintlairport.com/)HistoryThe earliest inhabitants of the Colorado River Valley were the people.  The rich soil and plentiful water provided the valleys natives with the necessities to create a prosperous farming community.  According to Mojave legend, life began on Mountain (Nevada), the highest peak visible from the Bullhead City area.(http://mojaveindiantribe.com/about/)The first account of European contact was with Spanish explorer Daz.  He documented his travels in Northwestern Mohave County in 1540.(http://www.newmexicohistory.org/filedetails.php?fileID472)  He accounts of meeting a large population of natives who referred to themselves as the Pipa Aha Macav, meaning People by the River.(namefortmojave.com>http://www.fortmojave.com/about.html)  From Aha Macav came the shortened name Mojave (also spelled Mohave).  While County uses the modern English spelling, the tribe retains the traditional Spanish spelling Mojave.  Both are correct, and both are pronounced Moh-hah-vee.(http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/Mojave)(http://www.mojaveindian.com/)In 1774, Garces crossed the Colorado River in the Bullhead City area.(http://anza.uoregon.edu/garces74.html)HardyvilleIn the 19th century, the current site of Bullhead City was called Hardyville, named for early resident and politician, William Hardy.  A York native and an entrepreneur, Hardy established a ferry service across the Colorado River and raised goats.  He was a colorful and somewhat controversial figure who is considered by many as the founding father of Bullhead City.  He was a postmaster, county supervisor and a member of the Territorial Legislature.  In 1864, his personal worth was over $40,000.00, making him the second richest man in Arizona.From 1852 to 1909, steamboats made regular trips up the Colorado River from Isabel, Sonora, passing Hardyville regularly. These stern-wheeler riverboats played an important part in the early development of the areas bordering the Colorado River.  The small town saw the construction of a general store, a saloon, a blacksmith shop, a quartz mill, a billiard hall, and a respectable public hall.Although the 19th century saw a population boom in Hardyville as mining became more profitable, the beginning of the 20th century saw mining activities move away from the Colorado River and Hardyville.  When the railroad was constructed from California to Arizona, Hardyville was abandoned and became a ghost town.  A small cemetery, now a historic landmark, is the most significant existing remnant of Hardyville.(http://www.uscemeteryproj.com/arizona/mohave/hardyville/hardyville.htm)Bullhead Citythumb|600px| Lake Mohave, pictured above, is on the north border of Bullhead City.Decades later, Hardyville would be resurrected as Bullhead City with the construction of Dam between 1942 and 1953.(http://www.bullheadcity.com/index.asp?TypeB_BASIC&SEC{387FAC15-81E3-42A5-A2B2-00CB5B5DBBF1}&DE{66999C05-4ACE-4926-A4A9-F79E0BFD6EEC})  The dam was originally called Bullhead Dam after Bulls Head Rock, a well-known landmark along the Colorado River. Bullhead City became the headquarters for the construction project, which was completed in 1953. Thus the name Bullhead City was born.  As the nearby Mohave developed into a major tourism destination, and as the casino and resort town of Nevada, sprouted up across the river, Bullhead City grew rapidly.(In 1970, Bullhead City was the name of the six blocks that ran north-south along Highway 95 across the river from Don Laughlins casino.  About a thousand people lived in original Bullhead City at that time, about 3,000 people in Riviera.  In 1984, the small communities of Bullhead City, Riviera, and Holiday Shores voted to incorporate, choosing the name Bullhead City for its historical significance.(http://www.sangres.com/arizona/places/mohave/bullhead-city.htm) The annual celebration Hardyville Days pays homage to the history of the town, and the man that first settled this shoreline along the Colorado River.(http://www.hardyvilledays.com/index.php?actionpage&page7)Bullhead City and the neighboring town of Laughlin, Nevada, have grown in popularity as tourist destinations, and so has the population.  Today, tourism is by far the main economy in Bullhead City.  In the summer months, tourists from all over come for water recreation on Lake Mohave and the Colorado River.  Starting in the fall, tourist from colder states flock by the thousands in their motor homes because of the mild winters.(http://www.arizona-leisure.com/bullhead-city-arizona.html)  The city is home to an international airport, two full-service hospitals, and a community college.  It also serves as the shopping hub of the tri-state area.Name originWhen the railroad bypassed Hardyville, it quickly became a ghost town until the construction of the Dam. The dam was originally called Bullhead Dam, taken from Bulls Head Rock, a rock formation along the Colorado River. http://www.topozone.com/map.asp?lon-114.573&lat35.2047 Steam boats on the Colorado River used the rock as a navigation point. After the construction of Davis Dam, the water rose and now almost completely covers the landmark. http://www.bullheadcity.com/index.asp?TypeB_BASIC&SEC{387FAC15-81E3-42A5-A2B2-00CB5B5DBBF1}&DE{66999C05-4ACE-4926-A4A9-F79E0BFD6EEC}http://www.bullheadcity.com/index.asp?TypeB_BASIC&SEC{AA17A224-ED08-4B73-A976-A5AA3F7C1BAE}&DE  The community that arose during construction of Bullhead Dam was nicknamed Bullhead.GeographyBullhead City is located at  (35.115643, -114.588655).According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 59.5 square miles (154.0 km), of which, 59.4 square miles (153.8 km) of it is land and 0.07 square miles (.2 km) of it (.13%) is water.DemographicsCDP.)As of the census of 2006, there were 40,225 people, 13,909 households, and 9,110 families residing in the city.(http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/04/0408220.html) The density was 746.6 people per square mile (288.3/km). There were 18,430 housing units at an average density of 407.5 per square mile (157.3/km). The racial makeup of the city was 85.57% White, 1.01% Black, 1.34% Native American, 1.00% Asian, 0.07% Pacific Islander, 8.25% from other races, and 2.75% from two or more races. 20.16% of the population were Hispanic.There were 13,909 households out of which 24.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.1% were married couples living together, 11.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.5% were non-families. 25.3% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.42 and the average family size was 2.86.In the city the population was spread out with 22.5% under the age of 18, 7.3% from 18 to 24, 24.5% from 25 to 44, 26.6% from 45 to 64, and 19.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females there were 98.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.2 males.The median income for a household in the city was $30,221, and the median income for a family was $33,914. Males had a median income of $23,617 versus $19,564 for females. The capita income for the city was $16,250. About 11.3% of families and 15.1% of the population were below the line, including 23.2% of those under age 18 and 6.9% of those age 65 or over.Bullhead City and the neighboring communities of Nevada, Mojave, Valley, Arizona and California, make up what is referred to as the Area.  This is an economically interdependent group of communities, all geographically connected within a ten mile (16 km) radius.  The population of the Tri-State Area, including Bullhead City, is about 75,000.(http://www.city-data.com/city/Laughlin-Nevada.html)(http://www.city-data.com/city/Mohave-Valley-Arizona.html)(http://www.city-data.com/city/Needles-California.html)(http://www.city-data.com/city/Bullhead-City-Arizona.html)  The area (human geography) of International Airport, according to its own statistics, includes 110,000 residents.(http://mohavedailynews.com/articles/2010/07/19/news/local/doc4c43cd53cccba560562789.txt) Climate Bullhead City has a desert climate (climate classification BWh), with a few inches of precipitation year-round. It is one of the Statess hottest cities during the summer, with an average July high of 110 to 115 (but has been known to reach 125+) Fahrenheit degrees or 48 to 49 Celsius degrees.dateAugust 2010 Parks and RecreationBullhead City is home to hundreds of acres of city-operated parks.  Ken Fovargue Park features lighted basketball courts, a bike trail, ball fields, a playground, and a public swimming pool with a water slide.  Rotary Park, the largest city park, covers  of riverfront land.  It features maintained beaches with ramadas and barbecues, a large skate park, fishing jetty, fish cleaning station, boat launching ramps, a disc golf course(http://www.mohavediscgolf.com/riverview), and a complete lighted sports complex that hosts regional tournaments and local competitions.(http://www.bullheadchamber.com/attractions.php)  In July 2011, ground was broken for the construction of two more large ramadas at Rotary Park.(http://www.bullheadcity.com/vertical/Sites/%7B1990D1CC-9371-444D-89E1-C42F66407C45%7D/uploads/Ramada_Groundbreaking_6-7-11.pdf) Land has been set aside for a dog park to be built in the near future.(http://www.bhcdogpark.com/)Annual EventsBullhead City is known for hosting annual events.  The most well known of these are the annual River Regatta, Hardyville Days, Riverfest, Cornfest, the Chile Cook-Off, and the Christmas Boombox Parade.  Neighboring communities, Laughlin, Oatman, and Needles, also hold several annual events.In August 2011, the annual River Regatta attracted an estimated 29,000 participants.(http://mohavedailynews.com/news/local/)  Just a few miles south of the city limits, in Fort Mohave, is the Mojave Crossing Event Center, an arena with a capacity of 5,000.  As the largest stadium/arena in Mohave County,(http://www.mojavecrossing.com/) it is frequently used for large events such as graduation ceremonies, circuses, indoor extreme motocross, monster truck rallies, and concerts.Education and CultureBullhead City is home to several educational institutions, the largest of which is the Bullhead City Campus of Mohave Community College.  The campus also houses Northern Arizona Universitys Bullhead City campus, which offers 4-year degree programs.  Recently, MCC Bullhead City received a donation of $1.8 million from the BHHS Legacy Foundation to build a 14,000 sq. ft. Health Sciences Building.  It is expected to be completed by August 2012.(http://blogs.mohave.edu/mohavewire/press-release/legacy-donation-will-make-new-mcc-programs-possible/)Educational Institutions*Community College Bullhead City Campus(http://mohave.edu/pages/1.asp)*Arizona University Bullhead City Campus(http://extended.nau.edu/Campus-Info/CampusDetail.aspx?campusBullhead+City)*Verde Community College Needles Campus(http://pages.paloverde.edu/staff/needles/)*Atlantic Driving School Fort Mohave(http://local.yahoo.com/info-26411808-atlantic-driving-school-fort-mohave)*Bullhead City Real Estate Licensing Classes Bullhead City(http://bullheadcityrealestateclasses.com/bullhead-city-real-estate-pre-licensing-classes/)*International Bible Institute Bullhead City(http://christianhomesite.com/bullhead/index.html)(http://www.sibi.cc/)*College of Southern Nevada Laughlin(http://www.yelp.com/biz/community-college-of-southern-nevada-laughlin)(http://www.csn.edu/about/index.asp)*of Building Industries Fort Mohave(http://www.aobihs.com/)*Charles of Italy Beauty College Mohave ValleyElementary, Junior High and High SchoolBullhead Citys Elementary schools and Junior High schools are operated by the City Elementary School District. These schools include Elementary School, Canyon Elementary School, Valley Elementary School, Elementary School, City Junior High School, and Creek Junior High School. Bullhead Citys high school Mohave High School and River Valley High School, are operated by the River Union High School District. Other nearby high schools are High School and High School. Additionally, Accelerated Elementary School and Accelerated Learning Center are public charter schools serving K-12 students in Bullhead City and the surrounding area. Other schools in nearby communities include Scholars Academy, Valley Junior High, Mohave Elementary, Mohave Elementary, and Valley Elementary.  Laughlin and Needles also have public elementary schools.LibrariesThe Bullhead City area is home to four public libraries:  Two Mohave County Libraries (Bullhead City and Mohave Valley),(http://mohavecountylibrary.info/mohave/bullhead.asp)(http://mohavecountylibrary.info/mohave/southmohave.asp) one Clark County Library(http://maps.google.com/maps/place?hlen&biw1280&bih557&bavon.1,or.&um1&ieUTF-8&qclark+county+library+laughlin&fb1&glus&hqclark+county+library+laughlin&hnearBullhead+City,+AZ+86442&cid15322536405735410675) (Laughlin) and one San Bernardino County Library (Needles).(http://www.sbcounty.gov/library/home/default.aspx?pagelibrarybranches/librarybranches.ascx&branchidnee)  Bullhead Citys library recently broke ground on a major expansion that will expand the library to include a  teen section, an  children section, and an adult section that will be approximately  and approximately  for community meeting rooms.(http://mohavecountylibrary.info/mohave/bullhead_expansion.asp)Colorado River Concert AssociationThe locally organized Colorado River Concert Association is a group of local citizens who attract performing artists to the community.  Their purpose is to provide entertainment to the community while offering opportunities to local students who are interested in the performing arts.  The Association usually attracts three to five artists per year to perform in local high school auditoriums.  In the past, the Association has brought such artists as Davidson, Celtic Tenors, Brass, Alpin Hong, The Montana Mandolin Society, and QuatroCelli.(http://www.coloradoriverconcerts.com/wordpress/)Colorado River Museum and Historical SocietyLocated in Bullhead City, just north of the Laughlin Bridge, the Colorado River Museum includes replicas of area landmarks, Native American artifacts and displays of historical items, from early settlers to the first slot machines. The museum is operated by the non-profit Colorado River Historical Society. It is open from September thorough May.(TransportationTrain, Bus, and HighwayThe Bullhead City area is accessible by Interstate 40 (via Needles or Kingman), Amtrak (via Needles BNSF), Greyhound Bus Services, and Highways 95 and 93.  Bullhead City also operates a full-service public transit system, BATS, and is home to several cab companies.  Sister cities Needles and Laughlin also operate their own public transit systems.AirportsThe International Airport is the only international airport in Mohave County.  There are daily flights to and from Bullhead City, with annual air shows attracting hundreds of spectators.  In 2011, the Laughlin/Bullhead International Airport was named Airport of the Year by the Department of Transportation.(http://laughlinbullheadintlairport.com/)The Bullhead City area is also home to two smaller airports. Airpark is a  rural airport south of the city limits.  Sun Valley Airport is a public use airport with a residential airpark.MediaThe Bullhead City area is home to several local newspapers, the most widely-read being The Valley Daily News.  Others include The Bullhead City Bee, The Needles Desert Star, The Laughlin Times, and The Mohave County Standard.(www.mohavedailynews.com)(http://www.thehighwaystations.com/)Laughlin operates a local TV Channel, KLBC, which delivers local news and other programming.  It is available through local cable companies and transmission towers.  Bullhead City operates a public service channel through local cable companies.  Over a dozen other regional network affiliates originate from Las Vegas and Phoenix.Bullhead City is home to Cameron Broadcasting, the parent company of four local radio stations: *KNKK (The Knack 107.1) Top 40 Pop(http://www.theknack107.com/index.mv)*KFLG (K-Flag) Country(http://www.kflg947.com/)*KLUK (Lucky 98) Classic Rock(http://www.lucky98fm.com/)*KZZZ (1490 A.M.) Talk RadioOther Radio Stations available in the Bullhead City area are:*KNPR (89.5) Public Radio(http://www.knpr.org/common/translators.cfm)*KZUL (95.3) Adult Contemporary(http://maddogwireless.net/stations/)*KRCY (103.9) Oldies*KRRK (106.3) Classic Rock*KVAL (104.9) Hot AC*KCAN (103.1) Angel Broadcasting Network(http://news.3abn.org/) Christian Talk & Music*KNLB (90.5) Christian Radio(http://www.knlb.com/)*KHWY (98.9) Pop and Regional Traffic & WeatherReligious, Social, and Special Interest GroupsThe Bullhead City Tri-State Area is home to dozens of religious organizations.  Among them are two of Christ (non-instrumental), three Roman Catholic churches, four Lutheran churches, three Methodist churches, over a dozen Baptist churches, two Churches, the Bullhead Islamic Center, two Witness Kingdom Halls, two Episcopal churches, two Adventist churches, Church of the Mohave Valley, two Assemblies of God, Foursquare (Spirit Life Church), Calvary Chapel,  Temple Israel Ba Midbor (Jewish services in Laughlin), and active Neo-Pagan (Coven of the Canyon and River) and Buddhist communities (Gakkai Colorado River District).(http://sgi-usa.org)(http://sgicoloradoriver.webs.com/) Bullhead City is also home to many special interest groups and social clubs.  Among them are The and Protective Order of Elks, Bullhead 4-Wheelers(http://www.bullhead4wheelersinc.com/), Kiwanis, River Cities Players and Community Theater, Clubs International(https://sites.google.com/site/bhclions/), Shriners, the Colorado River Historical Society, and International.Fort Mojave Indian TribeThe Mojave Indian Reservation covers almost  in the Tri-State area, and the local history is rich with Native American Culture.  Currently the tribe operates two casinos, one full-service hotel, and the Mojave Resort PGA Championship Golf Course.(http://www.fortmojave.com/about.html)  See also, the people.Environmental ProjectsThe Bullhead City area is expected to be the future home of a six billion dollar solar plant and energy farm.(http://www.edjmc.com/)  The solar plant, which will be built in Laughlin, Nevada, will potentially bring over 4,000 jobs to the Tri-State.(http://www.prlog.org/10225373-habit-for-humanity-goes-solar-in-bullhead-city-arizona.html)  In addition to this project, a 1,200 Megawatt solar generating facility has been approved by Mohave County, to be located on over , just over ten miles (16 km) outside of Bullhead City.(http://needlemountainpower.com/project-description/)  The decades-old Mohave Generating Station Coal Slurry Power Plant was shut down in 2005, reducing air pollution and excess use of river water.(http://www.lvrj.com/business/47761602.html)  Mohave Community College recently approved funding to construct a solar array on its Bullhead City campus.(www.mohave.edu)Becoville Laughlin was announced in 2010 as a  environmentally self-sustained community development in Laughlin Ranch, which is itself a master-planned community.  Construction is expected to begin in 2011.(http://www.energy.utah.gov/governorsenergyplan/publiccomments/becoville09102010.pdf)Other Projects*The Bullhead City Elementary School District has accepted a federal grant to convert a portion of their electricity to solar.(http://www.bullheadschools.com/cms/One.aspx?portalId9253373&pageId9253449)  *In March 2011, the City Council of Bullhead City passed a city-wide curbside recycling program.(http://mohavedailynews.com/articles/2011/03/16/news/local/doc4d806b91dfe7b874831989.txt)AgricultureThe Fort Mohave Indian Tribe and other private companies have created an agricultural community that covers several square miles in the fertile fields of Mohave Valley and Fort Mohave, just south of Bullhead City.  The main crops are cotton and alfalfa, with some Bermuda farms.  Because of the mild winter weather, and despite the extreme heat in the summer, the agricultural economy continues to boom in the area.(http://www.azcommerce.com/doclib/prop/originals/community%20economic%20analysis/north%20river/fort%20mojave-mohave%20valley/fort%20mojave-mohave%20valley%20area.pdf)Shopping, Dining and LodgingShoppingThe Bullhead City area is home to the regions only Outlet Mall, Target, Ross, Kohls, Bath and Beyond, PetSmart, Wakimoto Farmers Market, Lake Mohave Scuba, Stores, Staples, and Club.  Other stores in Bullhead City are Supercenter, K-mart, Lowes, C. Penney, Stage, Sears, Entertainment, 5 Sporting Goods, Depot, Walgreens, Pharmacy, Safeway, and Food & Drug. To see a complete list of places to shop go the the official Bullhead Area Chamber of Commerce website for the Bullhead City & Laughlin Area at RelyLocal.com.(RelyLocal.com. The official Bullhead Area Chamber of Commerce website for the Bullhead City & Laughlin Area.)DiningThe Bullhead City area is home to many great restaurants, including Samurai Steakhouse and Sushi, Wild Wings, and  House of Pancakes, Cork & Beans, a Coffee/Wine Bistro, Mohave Steakhouse, Maki Sushi, China Buffet, Red Dragon, Casa Serrano, El Palacio Mexican Restaurant, Antonuccis, Krispy Kreme, and Chilis.Other well known restaurants like Steakhouse, Crab Shack, are located in Laughlin NV just across the river from Bullhead City. To see a complete list of places to dine go to the official Bullhead Area Chamber of Commerce website for the Bullhead City & Laughlin Area at RelyLocal.com.(RelyLocal.com. The official Bullhead Area Chamber of Commerce website for the Bullhead City & Laughlin Area.)Hotels and ResortsWhile there are a few small motels in Bullhead City, the sister city of Nevada, makes visiting the area very convenient with more than 11,000 hotel rooms, full service spas, fitness centers, banquet halls, big-ticket concerts, and a River Walk.  Laughlin also has three cinema complexes, totalling 23 screens, a 34-lane bowling alley, a classic car museum, and dozens of restaurants.Lake MohaveBullhead City is at the southernmost border of Lake Mohave, which is part of Mead National Recreation Area.  The federally operated national recreation area offers year-round recreational opportunities. Its lakes cater to boaters, swimmers, and fishermen while its desert rewards hikers, wildlife photographers, and roadside sightseers. It is also home to thousands of desert plants and animals.  Contrary to popular belief, Lake Mohave is larger in area, deeper, and cleaner than Lake Havasu.  It is also less well-known and much less crowded than all of the other nearby lakes.White Water Rafting, Kayaking, and Scuba DivingThe stretch of the Colorado River between Hoover Dam and Lake Mohave is mostly tame but still enjoyable. It is recommended that inexperienced visitors ride with a guide.  If you decide not to hire a guide, permits are required to launch below Hoover Dam and can be obtained through the States Bureau of Reclamation.  Rafting supplies, canoes, kayak rentals and guided kayaking tours are available in Bullhead City.(http://www.nps.gov/lake/planyourvisit/things2do.htm)On Lake Mohave, scuba divers can explore Black Canyon, which has excellent diving conditions. Advanced divers can check out Ringbolt Rapids, where swift water makes for an additional challenge. Work Barge on the Arizona side has a  tow barge that sank in 1946. Cabinsite Point has two boat wrecks to view.(http://travelnevada.com/tourist-attractions/info/lake-mead-national-recreation-area-watersports.aspx)FishingFishing is popular on Lake Mohave and the Colorado River, which is plentiful with several species of fish, including Rainbow trout, Largemouth bass, Striped bass, crappie, sunfish, catfish (channel), and carp.  There are dozens of coves and inlets that are well known among fishing enthusiasts.(http://www.nps.gov/lake/planyourvisit/fishing.htm)Camping, Biking, and HikingThe recreation area around Lake Mohave includes dozens of designated hiking trails, camp sites, and bicycle trails.(http://www.nps.gov/lake/index.htm)Lake ResortsThere are two resorts on Lake Mohave: Cottonwood Cove and Lake Mohave Resort.  Both resorts have lodging, campgrounds, restaurant, store, and a marina with a gas dock.(http://www.riverlakes.com/lake_mohave.htm)  There are also off-road vehicle roads and hiking trails around Lake Mohave.  Supplies and equipment for off-roading, hiking, boating, scuba diving, and fishing are locally available.  There are sporting goods stores, scuba diving instructors, guided kayaking tours, and watercraft rentals available throughout Bullhead City.Notable residents*LAmour, best-selling author, worked as a young mine assessment worker just outside Bullhead City, at Katherine Mine.(http://www.louislamour.com/aboutlouis/biography2.htm)*McCandless of Into the Wild fame spent two months as a McDonalds employee in Bullhead City.*Powers, Radio Personality, born in Hollywood CA, on radio stations KISS FM, Los Angeles and KIK FM Orange County.*Dever, actor, grew up in Bullhead City, graduated from Mohave High School in 1994.(http://abc.go.com/shows/castle/bio/kevin-ryan/179207)*Lengson, Musician, Bass player and backing vocals for the hardcore band, MyBride.*Bloomfield, Musician, Guitar player for the hardcore band, MyBride.See also* International Airport* Nevada* people* Mohave* Mohave, Arizona* Mohave historical Fort Mohave* Valley, Arizona* California* ArizonaReferences*From The Weather Channel(External links* Official City Website* Bullhead Area Chamber of Commercebg:CityCityCityCityCityCity, ArizonaCityCity, ArizonaCityCityCityCityCity
106767
Nogales,_Arizona
footnotes                Nogales is a city in Santa Cruz County, Arizona, States. The population was 21,017 at the 2010 census. According to 2005 Census Bureau estimates, the population of the city is 20,833.()  The city is the seat of Santa Cruz County.Nogales, Arizona, borders the city of Nogales, Sonora, Mexico, and is Arizonas largest international border town. The southern terminus of 19 is located in Nogales at the U.S.-Mexico border; the highway continues south into Mexico as Federal Highway 15.Known in Oodham as Nowa:l, the name Nogales means black walnuts in Spanish, and the walnut trees which once grew abundantly in the mountain pass between the cities of Nogales, Arizona, and Nogales, Sonora, can still be found around the town.Nogales is known for being one of the most heavily used entry points for illegal immigrants crossing into the U.S. from Mexico.(http://www.tucsonweekly.com/tucson/smugglers-paradise/Content?oid2365902)GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all of it land.Elevation: 3,865 ft (1.178 mts)ClimateNogales has a semi-arid steppe climate, which is less hot and more rainy than a typical arid climate classification. In the winter months, Nogales averages in the mid to upper 60s, with both January and February averaging daily highs of 64F (18C). Lows typically settle just below the freezing mark (32F/0C) on a majority of nights, but it is not uncommon to see temperatures tumble below 25F (-4C) on some winter nights.On the other hand, in the summer months, highs average between 90F (32C) and 100F (38C), with the month of June being the hottest with an average daytime high of 96F (36C). Nighttime lows for the summer months remain in the upper 50s and lower 60s for the duration of the season. July and August typically see eight inches or more of combined rainfall, which brings the average annual precipitation for Nogales to about 19 in (483 mm).Nogales all-time highest recorded temperature is 112F (44C), which was reached on June 26, 1990. The lowest recorded temperature was -4F (-20C) on December 8, 1978.Historythumb|right|250px|Nogales, Santa Cruz Co. Showing boundary line between Arizona and Sonora.The name Nogales is derived from the Spanish word for walnut or walnut tree. It refers to the large stands of walnut trees that once stood in the mountain pass where Nogales is located.(A view of the center of town from hillside, looking west along International Street, ca. 1898-99)Nogales was at the beginning of the 1775-1776 Bautista de Anza Expedition as it entered the present day U.S. from Spain, and the town is now is on the Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail. On the second floor of the 1904 Nogales Courthouse is a small room dedicated to the 1775-76 Anza Expedition.(http://www.nps.gov/juba/planyourvisit/anza-related-sites.htm . accessed 8/30/2010)In 1841, a land grant from the Mexican government to the Elas family established Los Nogales de Elas. Following the purchase in 1853, Nogales became a part of the States of America. In 1880, Russian immigrant Jacob Isaacson built a trading post at present-day Nogales. The U.S. Postal Service opened the Isaacson post office but renamed it as Nogales in 1883.()On August 27, 1918, a battle between United States Army forces and a Mexican Army Garrison aided by German military advisors occurred.EconomyMost of Nogales economy is based on agribusiness and produce distributors, which comes from large farms in the Mexican agri-belt. Despite its small population, Nogales actually receives much patronage from its bordering sister-city, Nogales, Sonora, Mexico. Most observers guess the population of Nogales, Sonora, at roughly 300,000. International commerce is a big part of Nogales economy.(Kyl, McCain to DHS: Speed up Nogales border crossings. International. Retrieved on August 14, 2010.) More than 60 percent of Nogales sales tax comes from Mexican shoppers crossing the border daily.(Sales tax hike met with mixed response. International. Retrieved on August 14, 2010.) Nogales, Arizona, and Nogales, Sonora, are home to one of the largest maquiladora clusters. This enables American manufacturing plants on both sides of the border to take advantage of favorable wage and operating costs and excellent transportation and distribution networks.The Consulate-General of El Salvador in Nogales is located in Suite 3 at 840 North Grand Avenue.(Norte Amrica. Consulate-General of El Salvador in Miami. Retrieved on February 1, 2009.) The Consulate-General of Mexico in Nogales is located on 135 W. Cardwell St.,(Informacin sobre el consulado. Consulate-General of Mexico in Nogales. Retrieved on May 13, 2011.)Community FacilitiesThe city of Nogales has a wide range of community facilities. These include nine parks, a museum, an art gallery, a film theater, four recreation centers, four swimming pools, eight athletic fields, a library, six tennis courts and four golf courses. It has public elementary schools, middle schools, and high schools. Its financial institutions include six banks. Its governmental agencies include a staffed city and local fire department and a city police department. It is home to International Airport, which includes a 7,200 ft. runway and a terminal with a customs facility, passenger waiting areas, and a coffee shop. It has three regional health care facilities.Nogales is one of the few (if not the only) communities in the United States to operate buses in city bus service. These buses are privately owned and operated, and are not subject to any oversight. Because of this, in 2008, the city of Nogales will provide new vehicles that have air conditioning and are compliant with all regulations.Scenic AttractionsThe county of Santa Cruz and the city of Nogales have 200 properties listed in the National Register of Historic Sites, including National Monument visited by Father Kino in 1691 and Tubac Presidio, established by the Spanish in 1752 on an Indian village site. Others include the Old Tubac Schoolhouse, Old Nogales City Hall, Santa Cruz County Courthouse, and Patagonia Railroad Depot. The Patgonia-Sonoita Creek Sanctuary, 19 miles east, attracts worldwide visitors to see its diverse bird life. It is also host to ghost towns and mining camps, curio shops, first-class restaurants and night clubs.The Santa Cruz County Historical Courthouse on Morley Street/Court Street has the statue of Justice on top of the building. Lady Justice is supposed to have a blindfold on holding the scales of justice. This symbolizes that justice is blind. The Nogales version of Lady Justice is not wearing a blindfold.Demographicsthumb|left|Modern picture of the border between Arizona, on the left, and Sonora, on the right.As of the census of 2000, there were 20,878 people, 5,985 households, and 4,937 families residing in the city. The density was 1,002.1 people per square mile (387.0/km). There were 6,501 housing units at an average density of 312.0 per square mile (120.5/km). The racial makeup of the city was 77.83% White, 0.37% Black or African American, 0.57% Native American, 0.32% Asian, 0.07% Pacific Islander, 17.97% from other races, and 2.86% from two or more races. 93.59% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 5,985 households out of which 47.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.3% were married couples living together, 21.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 17.5% were non-families. 15.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 7.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.45 and the average family size was 3.86.In the city, the population was spread out with 34.6% under the age of 18, 9.5% from 18 to 24, 25.5% from 25 to 44, 19.5% from 45 to 64, and 10.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females there were 88.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 81.3 males.The median income for a household in the city was $22,306, and the median income for a family was $24,637. Males had a median income of $24,636 versus $18,403 for females. The capita income for the city was $10,178. About 30.8% of families and 33.9% of the population were below the line, including 41.2% of those under age 18 and 32.9% of those age 65 or over.City management*Mayor: Arturo Garino::On November 21, 2007, Mayor Ignacio Barraza died at the age of 38. He was the second mayor to die in office. Having not appointed a vice-mayor, Nogales lacked a clear line of succession for the office. In April 2008 Octavio Garcia-Von Borstel, 28, was named Mayor of the City of Nogales.*City Council:**Olga Valdez**Esther Melendez-Lopez**Ceasar Parrada**Nubar Hanessian**Arturo Garino**Ramon Felix*City Manager: Shane D. Dille*Assistant City Manager: John Kissinger*City Attorney: Joe Machado*City Clerk/City Treasurer: Leticia RobinsonDepiction in mediaNogales, Arizona, was the filming location for the motion picture version of the musical, Oklahoma! (1955). Nogales was chosen because it looked more like turn-of-the-century Oklahoma (when the musical is set) more than anywhere in Oklahoma did at that time. It was made an honorary part of the state of Oklahoma for the duration of the film shoot by order of the governor of Arizona.A small part of Gibsons The Gernsback Continuum short story refers to the city of Nogales. Also, the 1951 biblical motion picture and Bathsheba was filmed here.Nogales was mentioned as a border crossing point in Castanedas Don Juan series, and a gateway into the Mexican Yaqui communities of Sonora. Nogales is also mentioned in in Black and recently in a 3 video game advertisement: MAG. Massive Action Game.Nogales is a locale for filming some of the TV reality documentary, Border Wars.  Nogales is discussed in Season 1, Episode 2 in detail (as it relates to the subject matter of the show).Notable natives*Thomas Aranda, Jr. - US Ambassador to Uruguay 1981-85, b. 4/9/1934.*Baffert - Champion horse breeder and trainer, b. 1/13/1953.*Leo Bettwy - State Land Commissioner 1970-78, b. 5/31/1920, d. 12/1/2004.*Arana Serratrice - French professor, NHS Hall of Fame*Canchola - Businessman, philanthropist. First Hispanic McDonalds franchise owner.*Castaneda - Actress best known for being the second wife of actor Marlon Brando.*Heredia - Ten year Major League Baseball pitcher and University of Arizona Sports Hall of Fame member. Born 1965.*Edmonson - of 1960s influential folk duo Bud & Travis*Frederick (Jack) Hannah - Academy Award winning Disney Studios artist and director.*Mix Johnson - b.1889 - d.1939, Still life and landscape artist.*Arana - Abstract artist.*McIntyre - Actress. Starred in 22 feature films. Most notably as supporting character in Three Stooges films.*Mingus - Jazz bass player, composer, and bandleader, b. 4/22/1922 in Nogales, d. 1/5/1979.*Alvaro Ros - Author, poet. Won the 1981 Walt Whitman award for Whispering to Fool the Wind*Roger Smith - Husband to Movie star Margret*Bouvaire-Thompson - Actress, hairdresser. Humphrey Bogarts mistress from 1942 to 1955.*(James) David Lowell - One of the worlds most successful exploration geologists and is 2003s 30th recipient of the Penrose Gold Medal for outstanding contributions to economic geology. b. February 1928.*(Joseph Paul Summers) Brown - Journalist, Marine veteran, renowned cattleman, 1952 University of Notre Dame graduate and book author. Based on his own experiences, his two best known books from the 1970s Jim Kane (made into the film Pocket Money that starred Paul Newman and Lee Marvin) and The Outfit are classics today. b.1930.*(John Woolf) OConner - The longtime firearms editor for Outdoor Life magazine, OConnor hunted and collected trophies throughout the world, and introduced millions of readers to hunting and firearms. His influence, both directly and indirectly, on sporting and American sportsmen was considerable. b. January 22, 1902, d. January 20, 1978.See also* of Nogales* of Ambos NogalesReferences External links* Nogales-Santa Cruz County Chamber of Commerce* Official government website* Nogales Unified School District* Nogales International Newspaper* official U.S. National Park Service Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail website - Anza Trailhead Room at the 1904 Nogales Courthouse.* Photo gallery of past mayors of Nogales, Arizona* Nogales Community Profile()(Arizona)cs:Nogalesda:Nogales(Arizona)(Arizona)(Arizona)()ArizonaArizona(Arizona)(Arizona)(Arizona)ArizonaArizonaArizonavo:Nogales()
106882
Amity,_Arkansas
Amity is a city in Clark County, Arkansas, States. The population was 762 at the 2000 census. The city began on the River in the mid-19th century when William F. Browning and others, including Dr. A.B. Clingman at various times moved to the area.GeographyAmity is located at  (34.266246, -93.464093).According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all of it land.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 762 people, 305 households, and 208 families residing in the city. The density was 231.9 people per square mile (89.4/km). There were 361 housing units at an average density of 109.9/sq mi (42.4/km). The racial makeup of the city was 96.85% White, 0.92% Black or African American, 0.79% Native American, 0.92% from other races, and 0.52% from two or more races. 2.49% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 305 households out of which 34.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.1% were married couples living together, 9.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.5% were non-families. 27.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 13.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 3.07.In the city the population was spread out with 27.3% under the age of 18, 9.6% from 18 to 24, 26.9% from 25 to 44, 21.4% from 45 to 64, and 14.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females there were 96.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.7 males.The median income for a household in the city was $25,625, and the median income for a family was $32,188. Males had a median income of $22,330 versus $16,250 for females. The capita income for the city was $13,626. About 10.0% of families and 14.9% of the population were below the line, including 17.8% of those under age 18 and 17.9% of those age 65 or over.HistoryAmity was founded in 1847 by several pioneer families from the Mount Bethel area of Clark County under the leadership of William F. Browning, who served as the Clark County surveyor during the years of 1846 until his death in 1854. The group settled along the River, drawn to the area by an abundance of rich bottomland and fresh water. Browning constructed a two story log house just west of Caney Creek, which soon became the center of the expanding community. It was Browning who gave Amity its name.Together with other citizens, Browning formed the Caddo Valley Baptist Church of Christ, which before several other names would later develop into the Bethel Missionary Baptist Church in Glenwood and First Baptist Church in Amity. It is thought to be the first religious organization in the area, though Dr. A.B. Clingman, a physican and minister associated with the Church of Christ was in the area before Brownings group arrived. Brownings group built a large log house that would serve as both the church and the school house. The first school teacher was Captain Robert S. Burke, a former military officer and Brownings brother-in-law. A few months later, the first Amity Office was established nearby.With the outbreak of the Civil War, the community saw dark times. Initially in support of the Confederacy, soon the community became divided, with the men of Amity leaving to fight in both the Army and the Army. In several cases, families were split by their loyalties, causing turmoil within the small community. Midway through the war, Union soldiers burned the Burke schoolhouse and the Browning cotton press.Following the wars end, the center of the community shifted to the south side of the Caddo River, first settled by John Hays Allen and Dr. Amariah Biggs. Dr. Biggs was widely known as a physician and Methodist minister, and first settled in the area around 1850. The Amity Post Office was soon after relocated to this area. In 1870, retired army Colonel Philander Curtis, a Connecticut native, settled in the area. Curtis built the first house where the town of Amity now stands, and served for several years as the towns postmaster. In 1871, Col. Curtis, and businessmen Riley Thompson and Jacob H. Lightsey purchased property from John Hays Allen, and on that property they laid out plans for the town, centering around a public square. By 1874 Amity had become a thriving village, with several new businesses and churches. In 1877 an adjacent area became Amity Township, and in 1880 the town made a move to become incorporated, but it did not come to pass until 1907.In the late 1870s a new schoolhouse was built. Its first teacher was Richard Melancthon Burke, son of Captain Robert Burke. The residents also formed the Amity Male and Female Academy, which eventually became Amity High School. Richard Burke died in 1883, and the school struggled until 1888, when Samual M. Samson arrived in Amity. Samson spent the next twenty years as the head of the high school, which at that time was a private school. After his departure, it was absorbed into the Amity Public School System.In 1887, a false rumor that gold had been discovered in an area then known as the Trap Mountains resulted in a brief gold rush, which ended when the rumor proved false. Shortly after 1900, the Gurdon and Fort Smith Railroad was constructed through Amity, greatly improving the economy of the town. Soon, the logging industry began to thrive, with large sawmills opening in Rosboro and Glenwood. Amity became a main shipping and trade center for the area, and in 1905 the Bank of Amity opened, which now is on the Register of Historic Places. In 1899 the towns first newspaper, the Amity Enterprise, went into circulation, followed by the Four-County Courier in 1915 and the Amity Owl in 1922. Just before War II, the shortage of cinnabar caused a brief but productive mining industry in the nearby mountains south of the town, a phenomenon which became known as the Rush. However, any significant mining had ended by 1940, and following the war and an increased worldwide supply, the mines closed.Recent historyWith the Bean Lumber Company opening in 1940, followed by the Barksdale Lumber Company, logging soon became the main source of employment for the town. At its peak, the Bean Lumber Company was producing more than 150 million board feet of pine lumber and 120 million board feet of treated lumber annually, making it one of the largest distributors of southern pine in the United States. The Bean Lumber Company would later open mills in Glenwood, and in Missouri.()A.J. Hunter, who had originally came to town in 1905 to manage the citys first telephone exchange and who would later, upon the closure of the citys newspaper, begin The Owl, sold the paper in the 1940s to Marvin C. Bass of Little Rock.  The paper then operated until the mid-1950s and closed, though no one remembers when or why it closed.By 2007 Bean Lumber was struggling financially, and was under investigation for financial matters. The Amity mill closed, though the planer and treatment plants remained open. The Glenwood mill, which employed many Amity residents, closed and did not reopen until 2008. All of these events thoroughly affected the local economy, diminishing employment opportunities in the community, as well as briefly diminishing the population of the town, with many people being forced to search for work elsewhere.In 1995 the Amity Public Schools merged with Glenwood to create Centerpoint High School, located midway between the two towns in Arkansas, in County, Arkansas. The private Hills Academy, associated with the Adventist Church, is still located near Amity on the Clark-Pike County line and Word of Faith Christian Academy is located outside of town between Amity and Alpine.In 1996, Arkadelphia native Joe May came to Amity and founded the citys fourth newspaper, The Standard. Its first date of publication was February 1, 1996.  The paper is a weekly and covers Clark and Pike Counties as well as the Bismarck area. May, who is also an evangelist for churches of Christ, also ownes a folk history magazine published quarterly known as the Old Time Chronicle.In 2007, the city observed its 100th anniversary of incorporation with a two-day festival on the square. In 2008, the citys businesspeople formed a Chamber of Commerce.Notable persons associated with AmityBuck, Dr. Ron M., D.Min. - Senior Minister at Lindenwood Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) in Memphis, TN. Dr. Buck was raised from childhood in Amity and attended the local public schools. He has served churches in Arkansas, Tennessee, and Kentucky.Diffee, Agnes White - Noted Nazarene pastor, evangelist, and radio speaker. A native of Arkansas, Pastor Diffee was ordained in the Church of the Nazarene in 1919. Her first full-time ministerial work was as pastor of the Amity (Arkansas) church, where a new stone church was built and paid for under her leadership. She went on to become nationally famous for her work. (See: http://www.whwomenclergy.org/booklets/cloud_of_witnesses.php)Franks, Dr. George R., Jr., Ph.D. - Past Grand Master of Masons in Arkansas (2004).He received the Scottish Rite 33rd Degree and many other forms of Masonic recognition. Dr. Franks was raised from childhood in Amity and attended the local public schools. He was made a Mason in the local lodge, Sulphur Springs #100, in 1978.Holloway, Rufus Emory - A noted writer, his Whitman: An Interpretation in Narrative was the first biography of a major literary figure to win a Pulitzer Prize (1926). Mr. Holloway, a native of Missouri and graduate of Hendrix College, taught English for two years at Amity High School.(See: http://www.bookrags.com/biography/rufus-emory-holloway-dlb/)Rowe, Truett E. - FBI Special Agent killed in the line of duty on June 1, 1937, during an altercation with one Guy Osborne. Rowe was born in Amity in 1904 and educated in the local schools. He joined the FBI in 1935. (See: http://www.fbi.gov/libref/hallhonor/rowe.htm)Teague, Bertha Frank - Noted high school basketball coach and member of the Oklahoma Girls Basketball Coaches Association Hall of Fame; Oklahoma State University Alumni Association Hall of Fame; Oklahoma Sports Hall of Fame; and Missouri Basketball Hall of Fame. Born in Missouri, she attended the local public schools and graduated from Amity High School in 1924, before attending Oklahoma State University. (See: http://digital.library.okstate.edu/encyclopedia/entries/T/TE002.html)References(External links*Arkansas Encyclopedia, Amity, Arkansas*Bean Lumber Company*Market Conditions, Bean Lumber Company*Quicksilver Rush, 1931-1932(Arkansas)(Arkansas)(Arkansas)()
107348
Markleeville,_California
website                  Markleeville (formerly, Markleville)() is a place (CDP) and the seat of County, California.  The population was 210 at the 2010 census, up from 197 at the 2000 census.The CDP of Markleeville also includes Woodfords.HistoryMarkleeville traces its beginnings to the land claim of Jacob Marklee who established a toll bridge across a tributary of the River in 1861 during the height of the silver mining boom at nearby Mountain City. He recorded his land claim of  on June 23, 1862, in County, Nevada, but after the boundary survey his claim was in California. During the rush to the Lode, the town of Markleeville was built upon Marklees land. Marklee hoped to prosper from the freight and supplies headed to the mining camps, but was instead killed in a gunfight in 1863, his killer going free on a plea of self defense.A post office opened in Markleeville in 1863.(When the mines shut down, Markleeville assumed the county seat and remains the center of government services for Alpine County &mdash; the Alpine County Courthouse now occupies the site of Marklees cabin, which is Historical Landmark #240.GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all of it land.  The region comprising Markleeville is Alpine in appearance, with lush grassy valley areas.  There is a hot springs, and there is a State Park with an excellent campground.  Excellent hiking trails abound.ClimateMarkleeville has warm summers with only occasional rainfall, mostly from afternoon and evening thunderstorms; nights are usually well below .  Winters are cold and often snowy.  The average January temperatures are a maximum of  and a minimum of .  The average July temperatures are a maximum of  and a minimum of .  There are an average of 15.7 days with highs of  or higher and an average of 221.7 days with lows of  or lower.  The record high temperaure was  on July 11, 1931.  The record low temperature was  on December 22, 1990.Average annual precipitation is .  There are an average of 59 days with measurable precipitation.  The wettest year was 1996 with  and the driest year was 1917 with .  The most precipitation in one month was  in 1996.  The most precipitation in 24 hours was  on December 3, 1950.  Average annual snowfall is .  The snowiest year was 1916 with , including  in January 1916.(http://www.wrcc.dri.edu/cgi-bin/cliMAIN.pl?ca5356)Demographics2010The United States Census() reported that Markleeville had a population of 210. The density was 32.2 people per square mile (12.4/km). The racial makeup of Markleeville was 192 (91.4%) White, 0 (0.0%) African American, 4 (1.9%) Native American, 2 (1.0%) Asian, 0 (0.0%) Pacific Islander, 6 (2.9%) from other races, and 6 (2.9%) from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino of any race were 11 persons (5.2%). The Census reported that 210 people (100% of the population) lived in households, 0 (0%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 0 (0%) were institutionalized.  There were 100 households, out of which 19 (19.0%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 47 (47.0%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 5 (5.0%) had a female householder with no husband present, 5 (5.0%) had a male householder with no wife present.  There were 9 (9.0%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 1 (1.0%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 32 households (32.0%) were made up of individuals and 8 (8.0%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.10.  There were 57 families (57.0% of all households); the average family size was 2.67.The population was spread out with 39 people (18.6%) under the age of 18, 3 people (1.4%) aged 18 to 24, 42 people (20.0%) aged 25 to 44, 92 people (43.8%) aged 45 to 64, and 34 people (16.2%) who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 50.8 years. For every 100 females there were 101.9 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.2 males.There were 194 housing units at an average density of 29.7 per square mile (11.5/km), of which 63 (63.0%) were owner-occupied, and 37 (37.0%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.6%; the rental vacancy rate was 9.8%.  133 people (63.3% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 77 people (36.7%) lived in rental housing units.2000As of the census of 2000, there were 197 people, 92 households, and 57 families residing in the CDP.  The density was 10.3 people per square mile (4.0/km).  There were 173 housing units at an average density of 9.1 per square mile (3.5/km).  The racial makeup of the CDP was 97.5% White, 1.5% Native American, 1.0% from other races.  1.5% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 92 households out of which 20.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.1% were married couples living together, 7.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 38.0% were non-families. 30.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.14 and the average family size was 2.63.In the CDP the population was spread out with 17.3% under the age of 18, 3.6% from 18 to 24, 30.5% from 25 to 44, 34.0% from 45 to 64, and 14.7% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 45 years. For every 100 females there were 95.0 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.2 males.The median income for a household in the CDP was $46,563, and the median income for a family was $63,750. Males had a median income of $49,375 versus $25,972 for females. The capita income for the CDP was $40,774.  About 7.0% of families and 15.3% of the population were below the line, including 25.0% of those under the age of eighteen and 13.0% of those sixty five or over.Markleeville Death RideMarkleeville hosts an annual bicycle ride called the Death Ride.  The route goes over five passes for a total distance of 129 miles and over 15,000 feet of elevation gain.  In 2009 3,000 riders participated and 2,200 completed the full course.Referencesca:Markleevillede:Markleevillees:Markleevillefr:MarkleevilleCaliforniali:Markleevillenl:Markleeville()pt:MarkleevilleCaliforniaru:vo:Markleeville()
107373
Mokelumne_Hill,_California
website                   Mokelumne Hill (also, Big Bar, Mok Hill, and The Hill) is a place (CDP) in Calaveras County, California, States. The population was 646 at the 2010 census, down from 774 at the 2000 census. It is commonly referred to as Moke Hill by locals. The town takes its name from the neighboring River, which in turn is Miwok for the people of Mokel, the likely name of an Indian village in the area.HistoryMokelumne Hill was one of the richest gold mining towns in California. Founded in 1848 by a group of Oregonians, the placers were so rich that the miners risked starvation rather than head to Stockton to replenish their supplies (one finally did and made it rich by becoming a merchant). Soon after, gold was discovered in the nearby hills, so much so that miners were restricted to claims of , and yet many of those claims were reported to have paid up to $20,000.By 1850 the town was one of the largest in the area, with its population reaching as high as 15,000 with people of all nationalities: Americans, Frenchmen, Germans, Spaniards, Chileans, Mexicans, Chinese, and others. Besides racial tensions, the easy gold attracted criminal elements, and the town gained a reputation as one of the bawdiest in the area. Notorious bandit Murietta is said to have been a frequent visitor to the gambling venues. Violence was a major problem as well. In 1851, there was at least one homicide a week for seventeen consecutive weeks. A vigiliance committee was formed and by 1852, the worst of the crime was eliminated. That year, the town became the seat.By the 1860s the gold started to run out and the towns population and importance diminished. When San Andreas became the new county seat in 1866, Mokelumne Hills status declined even further. The town today is a quiet place, with lots of tourism due to its historic status.From 1959-1977 Mokelumne Hill was home to Lucile S. Davidson. She was known as The shoe lady of Mokelumne Hill She was in The Stockton Record and later in the Guinness Book Of World Records for having the largest privately owned glass shoe collection in the world.The first post office was established in 1851.()Mokelumne Hill is registered as Historical Landmark #269.Landmarks*The I.O.O.F. Hall (CHL #256) is said to be Californias first three-story building to be erected outside the coastal towns.*The Church building (CHL #261) is the oldest such in the state.*The Hotel (CHL #663) is one of the oldest continuously-operating hotels in California. One of its buildings was the county courthouse when the town was the county seat.*The original elementary school in Mokelumne Hill, which is still standing but has been converted to a private residence, was built in 1852 and was used until 1964. Unconfirmed legend has it that a bond issue to build the school failed, but citizens of the town built it anyway.* The basement of the Leger Hotel was the first meeting place of Clampus Vitus.GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of 3.1 square miles (8.0 km), over 99% of it land.Demographics2010The United States Census() reported that Mokelumne Hill had a population of 646. The density was 209.6 people per square mile (80.9/km). The racial makeup of Mokelumne Hill was 571 (88.4%) White, 3 (0.5%) African American, 12 (1.9%) Native American, 4 (0.6%) Asian, 0 (0.0%) Pacific Islander, 26 (4.0%) from other races, and 30 (4.6%) from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino of any race were 66 persons (10.2%). The Census reported that 646 people (100% of the population) lived in households, 0 (0%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 0 (0%) were institutionalized.  There were 299 households, out of which 63 (21.1%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 129 (43.1%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 31 (10.4%) had a female householder with no husband present, 14 (4.7%) had a male householder with no wife present.  There were 24 (8.0%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 5 (1.7%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 99 households (33.1%) were made up of individuals and 38 (12.7%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.16.  There were 174 families (58.2% of all households); the average family size was 2.71.The population was spread out with 102 people (15.8%) under the age of 18, 39 people (6.0%) aged 18 to 24, 119 people (18.4%) aged 25 to 44, 245 people (37.9%) aged 45 to 64, and 141 people (21.8%) who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 51.4 years. For every 100 females there were 88.9 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.4 males.There were 354 housing units at an average density of 114.9 per square mile (44.4/km), of which 205 (68.6%) were owner-occupied, and 94 (31.4%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 2.8%; the rental vacancy rate was 18.3%.  447 people (69.2% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 199 people (30.8%) lived in rental housing units.2000As of the census of 2000, there were 774 people, 340 households, and 227 families residing in the CDP.  The density was 252.5 people per square mile (97.3/km).  There were 362 housing units at an average density of 118.1 per square mile (45.5/km).  The racial makeup of the CDP was 94.96% White, 0.26% Black or African American, 1.55% Native American, 0.39% Asian, 0.13% from other races, and 2.71% from two or more races.  4.26% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 340 households out of which 24.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.8% were married couples living together, 13.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.2% were non-families. 27.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.28 and the average family size was 2.71.In the CDP the population was spread out with 21.7% under the age of 18, 5.7% from 18 to 24, 21.6% from 25 to 44, 30.5% from 45 to 64, and 20.5% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 46 years. For every 100 females there were 95.9 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.4 males.The median income for a household in the CDP was $35,526, and the median income for a family was $37,237. Males had a median income of $36,382 versus $25,385 for females. The capita income for the CDP was $17,281.  About 3.7% of families and 7.7% of the population were below the line, including 6.8% of those under age 18 and 3.9% of those age 65 or over.PoliticsIn the state legislature Mokelumne Hill is located in the 1st Senate District, represented by Republican Cox, and in the 25th Assembly District, represented by Republican Olsen. Federally, Mokelumne Hill is located in 3rd congressional district, which has a Cook PVI of R +7() and is represented by Republican Lungren.References*External links*Edith Irvine Collection includes photographs of Mokelumne HillHillHillHillHill
107435
Shingle_Springs,_California
website                   Shingle Springs (formerly, Shingle Spring and Shingle)() is a place (CDP) in El Dorado County, California, States. The population was 4,432 at the 2010 census, up from 2,643 at the 2000 census. It is located about 40 miles from Sacramento in the historic Country foothills and sits directly on Highway 50. The historic towns of Coloma and Placerville are less than 15 miles away.Shingle Springs is part of the Sacramento&ndash;Arden-Arcade&ndash;Roseville Metropolitan Statistical Area.HistoryLike any number of other towns in Californias Mother Lode, Shingle Springs grew on the site of a mining camp set up by gold miners during the Gold Rush, in this case a group of 48ers who had followed the Carson-Emigrant Trail through Valley, Nevada. It took its name from a horse-drawn shingle machine capable of producing 16,000 shingles a day that was located near the springs at the western edge of the camp.(Shingle Springs  A Gold Rush Mining Camp Turns Rail Town by Anthony Belli; retrieved June 5, 2007) The Joint Stock Association, which left Boston April 16, 1849, camped there the night before their arrival at Fort on September 27, after a remarkable journey across the continent. A rich store of written records preserved by these pioneers has left a detailed picture of the Gold Rush. As a result, the town is now designated Historical Landmark #456.The Shingle Spring post office operated from 1853 to 1855.( The Shingle Springs post office opened in 1865, the name was changed to Shingle in 1895, and reverted in 1955.(GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which, over 99% is land.For the 2000 census, the CDP had a total area of , of which,  of it was land and 0.19% was water.Demographics2010The United States Census() reported that Shingle Springs had a population of 4,432. The density was 538.0 people per square mile (207.7/km). The racial makeup of Shingle Springs was 3,919 (88.4%) White, 14 (0.3%) African American, 108 (2.4%) Native American, 50 (1.1%) Asian, 3 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 132 (3.0%) from other races, and 206 (4.6%) from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino of any race were 469 persons (10.6%). The Census reported that 4,344 people (98.0% of the population) lived in households, 88 (2.0%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 0 (0%) were institutionalized.  There were 1,627 households, out of which 527 (32.4%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 1,015 (62.4%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 163 (10.0%) had a female householder with no husband present, 73 (4.5%) had a male householder with no wife present.  There were 76 (4.7%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 12 (0.7%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 291 households (17.9%) were made up of individuals and 104 (6.4%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.67.  There were 1,251 families (76.9% of all households); the average family size was 3.01.The population was spread out with 1,031 people (23.3%) under the age of 18, 334 people (7.5%) aged 18 to 24, 874 people (19.7%) aged 25 to 44, 1,568 people (35.4%) aged 45 to 64, and 625 people (14.1%) who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 44.6 years. For every 100 females there were 97.7 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.4 males.There were 1,718 housing units at an average density of 208.6 per square mile (80.5/km), of which 1,248 (76.7%) were owner-occupied, and 379 (23.3%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.2%; the rental vacancy rate was 5.2%.  3,343 people (75.4% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 1,001 people (22.6%) lived in rental housing units.2000As of the census of 2000, there were 2,643 people, 951 households, and 731 families residing in the CDP.  The density was 507.4 people per square mile (195.9/km).  There were 969 housing units at an average density of 186.0 per square mile (71.8/km).  The racial makeup of the CDP was 91.68% White, 0.38% Black or African American, 1.29% Native American, 1.63% Asian, 0.15% Pacific Islander, 1.32% from other races, and 3.56% from two or more races.  6.62% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 951 households out of which 37.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.8% were married couples living together, 13.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.1% were non-families. 18.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.76 and the average family size was 3.12.In the CDP the population was spread out with 29.4% under the age of 18, 8.5% from 18 to 24, 24.0% from 25 to 44, 24.5% from 45 to 64, and 13.7% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 90.3 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.5 males.The median income for a household in the CDP was $55,100, and the median income for a family was $59,263. Males had a median income of $48,026 versus $31,635 for females. The capita income for the CDP was $25,795.  About 5.9% of families and 6.1% of the population were below the line, including 3.9% of those under age 18 and 1.4% of those age 65 or over.PoliticsIn the state legislature Shingle Springs is located in the 1st Senate District, represented by Republican Cox, and in the 4th Assembly District, represented by Republican Gaines. Federally, Shingle Springs is located in 4th congressional district, which has a Cook PVI of R +11() and is represented by Republican McClintock.ReferencesSpringsSpringsSpringsSpringsSpringsSprings
107524
Boron,_California
website                   Boron (formerly, Amargo, Baker, Borate, and Kern)( is a place (CDP) in Kern County, California, States. Boron is located  east-southeast of Butte,() at an elevation of 2467 feet (752 m).( The population was 2,253 at the 2010 census, up from 2,025 at the 2000 census. Boron is named after the element boron and is the location of the worlds largest source of the boron compound, acid.Boron is a hinterland community on the western edge of the Desert. Within a half days drive one can view the highest and lowest points in the contiguous 48 states of the United States (Whitney and Valley), the worlds oldest tree (the Pine), and the cities of both Angeles and Las Vegas. Boron is home to the Borax Boron Mine, Californias largest open-pit mine, which is also the largest borax mine in the world. GeographyBoron is located at the border of Kern and San Bernardino Counties along State Route 58. The coordinates are: .(  Boron is  north of Palmdale,  east of Bakersfield, and  west of Barstow in the Valley region of Californias Desert.Its elevation is .(Boron, California CA, profile (Kern County) - hotels, festivals, genealogy, newspapers - ePodunk)According to the States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , over 99% of it land.Demographics2010The United States Census() reported that Boron had a population of 2,253. The density was 163.0 people per square mile (62.9/km). The racial makeup of Boron was 1,746 (77.5%) White, 162 (7.2%) African American, 49 (2.2%) Native American, 47 (2.1%) Asian, 4 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 141 (6.3%) from other races, and 104 (4.6%) from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino of any race were 406 persons (18.0%). The Census reported that 2,253 people (100% of the population) lived in households, 0 (0%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 0 (0%) were institutionalized.  There were 892 households, out of which 295 (33.1%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 364 (40.8%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 126 (14.1%) had a female householder with no husband present, 61 (6.8%) had a male householder with no wife present.  There were 67 (7.5%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 3 (0.3%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 294 households (33.0%) were made up of individuals and 112 (12.6%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53.  There were 551 families (61.8% of all households); the average family size was 3.21.The population was spread out with 621 people (27.6%) under the age of 18, 173 people (7.7%) aged 18 to 24, 472 people (20.9%) aged 25 to 44, 691 people (30.7%) aged 45 to 64, and 296 people (13.1%) who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 39.3 years. For every 100 females there were 106.9 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 107.1 males.There were 1,208 housing units at an average density of 87.4 per square mile (33.7/km), of which 505 (56.6%) were owner-occupied, and 387 (43.4%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 3.2%; the rental vacancy rate was 31.4%.  1,246 people (55.3% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 1,007 people (44.7%) lived in rental housing units.2000As of the census of 2000, there were 2,025 people, 801 households, and 535 families residing in the CDP. The density was 146.2 people per square mile (56.5/km). There were 1,103 housing units at an average density of 79.6 per square mile (30.7/km). The racial makeup of the CDP was 85.04% White, 2.22% Black or African American, 2.86% Native American, 1.58% Asian, 0.10% Pacific Islander, 4.74% from other races, and 3.46% from two or more races. 9.04% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 801 households out of which 31.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.7% were married couples living together, 10.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.1% were non-families. 29.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 3.11.In the CDP the population was spread out with 28.0% under the age of 18, 6.7% from 18 to 24, 25.2% from 25 to 44, 26.9% from 45 to 64, and 13.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 100.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.0 males.The median income for a household in the CDP was $40,625, and the median income for a family was $44,674. Males had a median income of $47,045 versus $23,854 for females. The capita income for the CDP was $18,294. About 15.2% of families and 19.7% of the population were below the line, including 32.8% of those under age 18 and 19.4% of those age 65 or over. History Dr. J. K. Suckow was drilling a well for water 4 miles northwest of Boron when he discovered colemanite, a borax ore, in October, 1913. After his discovery, claims, mostly placer, were located in the area. The Pacific Coast Borax Company, upon recommendation of its field engineer, Clarence Rasor, acquired many of these claims, including the discovery well. The company then started explorations to determine the extent of the orebody. Suckow continued to have an interest in the area, working prospects east of his discovery well.In 1924, anxious to repeat his good fortune, Suckow sunk a shaft one-half mile away from his first, and he struck basalt at  . The Pacific Coast Borax Company did their own prospecting in the same area, with almost the same results: basalt at . However, persistence paid off. That same year Suckow sunk another shaft just a little south of his last one and found a  thick bed of colemanite at . In 1925 the Suckow Chemical Company produced a few hundred tons of colemanite from this shaft.In the Spring of 1925, William M. Dowsing and J. L. Hannan discovered a huge deposit  thick just 1 miles west of Suckows shaft, which they kept a secret until its extent was proven. Sold to the Pacific Coast Borax Company in early 1926, it became known as the Baker Mine. Beginning production in 1927, it yielded a substantial percentage of the borates produced in the Kramer District until 1935.Production began in December, 1929, at the Suckow Mine, located near the Baker Mine. Suckow Borax Mines Consolidated, Ltd. shared half-interest as tenant in common of the Suckow Mine with Borax Consolidated, Ltd. The two companies became involved in litigation which resulted in the closure of the mine in 1932. It was reopened in 1935 as the West Baker Mine with the Borax Consolidated, Ltd. as owners.(Desert Fever, Kern County)The first post office at Boron opened in 1938.( Industry A large borax deposit was discovered in 1925,(Rio Tinto Borax: About Borax: History) and the mining town of Boron was established soon thereafter. This borax deposit is now the worlds largest borax mine,( which is owned by Rio Tinto Minerals (formerly U.S. Borax). This is operated as an open-pit mine, which is the largest open-pit mine in California.(ftp.dir.ca.gov)(minerals.usgs.gov) This mine supplies nearly half of the worlds supply of refined borates.(leica-geosystems.com) Rio Tinto Minerals is Borons primary employer, employing over 800 people.(U.S. Borax Boron Mine) east of Boron, across the county line in San Bernardino County, is the worlds largest solar power production facility.(Solar Trough Systems) The Kramer Junction Company (KJC) is the Managing General Partner of the five 30-Megawatts Energy Generating Systems (SEGS)  facilities located in the Mojave Desert at Kramer Junction, California. Together with its wholly owned subsidiary, KJC Operating Company, KJC operates and manages these facilities (SEGS III-VII).(Solel - Leading the World in Solar Thermal Energy | Kramer Junction SEGS III, IV, V, VI,VII) These units generate enough electricity to provide the electrical needs of 30,000 to 40,000 homes without the use of fossil fuels.(The Energy Blog: About Parabolic Trough Solar) Public services  Law enforcement Law enforcement services are provided by the Kern County Sheriffs Department.(Sheriff Home) From 1933 to 1954 personnel from the Mojave Substation met the law enforcement need of the Boron area. The first actual office space occupied by the Sheriffs Office in Boron was a Quonset hut shared with the Fire Department in the 12200 block of Boron Avenue. This continued until 1963 when the Sheriffs Office established the substation building at 26949 Cote Street. This building housed a small jail and the Justice Court in Boron, which operated one day a week.(Mojave/Boron co.kern.ca.us) Fire services In 1969 the new Boron station 17 opened at 26965 Cote Street. This fire station is operated by the Kern County Fire Department.(Kern County Fire Department Website) Schools Boron schools are part of the Muroc Joint Unified School District. The local Boron schools include the K  6 grade  West Boron Elementary School,(muroc.k12.ca.us) and the 7  12th grade Boron High School.(muroc.k12.ca.us) Boron High Schools mascot is the Bobcat. Borons first school, Gephart School was built in 1929. It burned to the ground in 1994.() Churches Borons original church building was completed for the First Baptist Church in 1940. Boron currently has eight churches. They are the Assembly of God Church, the Boron Bible Church, the Church of Christ, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the First Baptist Church of Boron, the Jesus Name Tabernacle United Pentecostal Church, St. Josephs Catholic Church and Christians in Faith Church. Notable residents *Boron was the home of Walking George Swain, whose penchant for walking made him a legend. George earned his name as Walking George because he never owned a car, or home, and walked to and from work  from his home, which was always rumored to be just a hole in the desert. He supposedly kept himself warm at night with a covering of newspapers. His wardrobe was always the same: wrinkled shirt and pants with well-worn boots. He attended local events and often played the piano for entertainment. He taught piano to children in Boron and played at the Baptist Church. On his 59th birthday in 1978 an article about George appeared in the Angeles Times. By May 1979 he was featured on the TV show People. He died on April 25, 2000.()(Mojave Desert News, California City, Kern County, CA) Media The movie Erin Brockovich (2000), starring Roberts, and various other movies have been filmed in the town, often using citizens as extras.()*Movies/shows using locations in and around Boron(Titles with locations includingBoron, California, USA):* Brockovich (2000):* Gentleman Don La Mancha (2004)(The Gentleman Don La Mancha (2004)):* Gang (1993) (TV):* Neon Signs (1996)(Neon Signs (1996)):* Spotlight on Location: Erin Brockovich (2000)(Spotlight on Location: Erin Brockovich (2000) (TV)) (TV):* ...aka Making of Erin Brockovich, The (2000) (TV):*Valley Days (19521975):* Carpetbaggers (1964)(Discover Kern County: Movies) References External links* Boron Chamber of Commerce* Muroc Joint Unified School District* West Boron Elementary School* Boron High School* Twenty Mule Team Museum* Colonel Vernon P. Saxon Jr. Aerospace Museum* Borax Visitors Center (Califrnia)(California)(California)(Californi)(Califrnia)(California)
107727
Mill_Valley,_California
website                   Mill Valley is a city in Marin County, California, States located about  north of San Francisco via the Gate Bridge. The population was 13,903 at the 2010 census.Mill Valley is located on the western and northern shores of Bay. Beyond the flat coastal area and marshlands, it occupies narrow wooded canyons, mostly of second-growth redwoods, on the southern slopes of Tamalpais. The Mill Valley 94941 code also includes the following adjacent unincorporated communities: Almonte, Alto, Homestead Valley, Strawberry and Tamalpais Valley. The Woods National Monument is also located just outside the city limits.HistoryCoast MiwokThe first people known to inhabit Marin County, the Miwok, arrived approximately 6,000 years ago. The territory of the Coast Miwok included all of Marin County, north to Bodega Bay and southern Sonoma County. More than 600 village sites have been identified,including 14 sites in the Mill Valley area. Nearby archaeological discoveries include the rock carvings and grinding sites on Ring Mountain.(C. Michael Hogan. 2008.  Ring Mountain, The Megalithic Portal, ed. A. Burnham) The pre-Missionization population of the Coast Miwok is estimated to be between 1,500 (Alfred L. Kroebers estimate for the  year 1770 A.D.(Kroeber, Alfred L. 1925. Handbook of the Indians of California. Washington, D.C: Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 78. (Chapter 30, The Miwok); available at Yosemite Online Library) to 2,000 (Sherburne F. Cooks estimate for the same year(Cook, Sherburne. 1976. The Conflict Between the California Indian and White Civilization. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-03143-1.)). The pre-Missionization population of the Coast Miwok may have been as high as 5000. Cook speculated that by 1848 their population had decreased to 300, and down to 60 by 1880.  As of 2011 there are over 1,000 registered members of the Indians of Graton Rancheria which includes both the Coast Miwok and the Pomo, all of whom can date their ancestry back to the 14 survivors original tribal ancestors.(http://www.gratonrancheria.com/ourpeople.htm) The Lucretia Hanson Little History Room in the Mill Valley Public Library has some oral histories recorded from some Coast Miwok descendants(http://www.millvalleylibrary.org/Index.aspx?page532)In Mill Valley, on Locust Avenue between Sycamore and Walnut Avenues, there is now a metal plaque set in the sidewalk in the area believed to be the birthplace of Marin nearly 230 years ago; the plaque was dedicated on 8 May 2009.(http://www.marinij.com/millvalley/ci_12329056) The village site was first identified by Nels Nelson in 1907 and his excavation revealed tools, burials and food debris just beyond the driveway of 44 Locust Ave. At that time, the moud was 20 feet high. Another famous Mill Valley site was in the Manzanita area underneath the Fireside Inn (previously known as the Manzanita Roadhouse, Manzanita Hotel, Emil Plasbergs Top Rail, and Top Rail Tavern, most of which were notorious Prohibition-era gin joints and brothels) located near the intersection of Route 101 and State Route 1. Built in 1916, the pig roadhouse was outside the dry limits of the city itself. Shell mounds have been discovered in areas by streams and along Richardson Bay, including in the Strawberry and Almonte neighborhoods.Beginning with the foundation of San Francisco de Ass, commonly known as Mission Dolores, in 1776, the Coast Miwok of southern Marin began to slowly enter the mission, first those from Sausalito followed by those from areas we now know as Mill Valley, Belvedere, Tiburon and Bolinas. They called themselves the Huimen people.  At the mission they were taught the Catholic religion, lost their freedom, and three quarters died as a result of exposure to European diseases.  As a result of the high death rate at Mission Dolores it was decided to build a new Mission San Rafael, built in 1817. Over 200 surviving Coast Miwok were taken there from Mission Dolores and Mission San Jose,including the 17 survivors of the Huimen Coast Miwok of the Richardson Bay Area. California Missions.(Goerke, Betty. 2007. Chief Marin, Leader, Rebel, and Legend: A History of Marin Countys Namesake and his People. Berkeley, CA: Heyday Books. ISBN 13:978-1-59714-053-9)Early settlersthumb|left|225px|altJohn Joseph Reed House c. 1884.|John Joseph Reed House c. 1884. Courtesy of the Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Room By 1834 the Mission era had ended and California was under the control of the Mexican government.  They took Miwok ancestral lands, divided them and gave them to Mexican soldiers or relatives who had connections with the Mexican governor.  The huge tracts of land, called ranchos by the Mexican settlers, or Californios, soon covered the area.  The Miwoks who had not died or fled were often employed under a state of servitude to the California land grant owners.  In 1834, the governor of Alta California Figueroa awarded to John T. Reed the first land grant in Marin, Corte Madera del Presidio.  Just west of that, Saucelito was transferred to  A. Richardson in 1838 after being originally awarded to Nicolas Galindo in 1835. John Reed married Hilarita Sanchez, the daughter of a commandante in the San Francisco Presidio.  William Richardson also married a well-connected woman; both he and Reed were originally from Europe. Richardsons name was later applied to Bay, an arm of the Francisco Bay that brushes up against the eastern edge of Mill Valley.  The latter rancho contained everything south and west of the Madera and Larkspur areas with the Ocean, San Francisco Bay, and Richardson Bay as the other three borders.  The former encompassed what is now southern Corte Madera, the Peninsula, and Strawberry Point.(http://www.co.marin.ca.us/depts/lb/main/crm/maps/MarinRanchosMap.swf)thumb|right|225px|altReeds adobe house c. 1890 after being destroyed by fire.|Reeds adobe house c. 1890 after being destroyed by fire. Courtesy of the Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Room In 1836, Reed married Hilaria Sanchez, the daughter of the commandant of the local presidio.  He built the first sawmill in the county on the Cascade Creek (now Old Mill Park) in the mid-1830s on Richardsons rancho and settled near what is now Locke Lane and LaGoma Avenue.(http://www.millvalleylibrary.org/Index.aspx?page989) The mill cut wood for the Francisco Presidio.  He also raised cattle and horses and had a brickyard and stone quarry.  Reed also did brisk businesses in hunting, skins, tallow, and other products until his death in 1843 at 38 years of age.(http://www.co.marin.ca.us/depts/lb/main/crm/maps/presidio.html) Richardson sold butter, milk and beef to San Francisco during the Rush.  Shortly thereafter, he made several poor investments and wound up massively in debt to many creditors.  On top of losing his County rancho he was forced to deed  of Rancho Saucelito to his wife, Maria Antonia Martinez, daughter of the commandant of the Presidio, in order to protect her.  The rest of the rancho, including the part of what is now Mill Valley that did not already belong to Reeds heirs, was given to his administrator Samuel Reading Throckmorton.  At his death in 1856 at 61 years old, Richardson was almost entirely destitute.(http://www.co.marin.ca.us/depts/lb/main/crm/maps/sausalito.html)Throckmorton came to San Francisco in 1850 as an agent for an eastern mining business before working for Richardson.  As payment of a debt, Throckmorton acquired a large portion of Rancho Saucelito in 1853-4 and built his own rancho The Homestead on what is now Linden Lane and Montford Avenue.  The descendants of ranch superintendent Jacob Gardner continue to be active in Marin.  Some of the rest of his land was leased out for dairy farming to Portuguese settlers.( A majority of the immigrants came from the Azores Islands.  Those who were unsuccessful at gold mining came north to the Headlands and later brought their families.  In Mill Valley, Ranch B is one of the few remaining dairy farm buildings and is located near the parking lot at the Tennessee Valley trailhead.(http://www.nps.gov/goga/historyculture/portuguese-dairy-farmers.htm) Throckmorton also suffered devastating financial problems before his death in 1887.  His surname would later be applied to one of the major thoroughfares in Mill Valley.Richardson and Reed had never formalized the boundary lines separating their ranchos.  Richardsons heirs successfully sued Reeds heirs in 1860 claiming the mill was built on their property.  The border was officially marked as running along the Corte Madera del Presidio along present day Miller Avenue.  Everything to the east of the creek was Reed property, and everything to the west was Richardson land.  It was Richardsons territory that would soon become part of Mill Valley when Throckmortons daughter Suzanna was forced to relinquish several thousand acres to the Francisco Savings & Union Bank to satisfy a debt of $100,000 against the estate in 1889.(http://www.millvalleyhistoricalsociety.org/history-of-early-mill-valley.html)thumb|left|225px|altBlithedale Hotel c. 1880-1890s.|Blithedale Hotel c. 1880-1890s. Courtesy of the Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Room In 1873, San Francisco physician Dr. John Cushing discovered 320 lost acres between the Reed and Richardson boundaries between present day Corte Madera Avenue, across the creek, and into West Blithedale Canyon.  Using the Act he petitioned the government and managed to acquire the land.  Before his death in 1879 he had built a sanitarium in the peaceful canyon.( In Sausalito the Pacific Coast Railroad had laid down tracks to a station near present day Highway 101 at Strawberry.  Seeing the financial advantages of a railroad his descendants then turned the hospital into the Blithedale Hotel after the land title was finally granted in 1884.  The sanitarium was enlarged, cottages were built up along the property, and horse-drawn carriages were purchased to pick up guests at the Alto station.  Within a few years, several other summer resort hotels had cropped up in the canyon including the Abbey, the Eastland, and the Redwood Lodge.(http://www.pacificsun.com/story.php?story_id853) Fishing, hunting, hiking, swimming, horseback riding, and other activities increased in popularity as people came to the area as vacationers or moved in and commuted to San Francisco for work.  Meanwhile, Reeds mill deforested much of the surrounding redwoods meaning most of the redwoods growing today are second or third growth.The King family (King Street) also owned property near the Cushing land.  One of its buildings was a small adobe house which, according to oral histories available at the Lucretia Hanson Little History Room in the Mill Valley Public Library, is believed to have predated the King farm.( The Blithedale Hotel used it as a milk house.  The adobe structure is still standing and connected to a house on West Blithedale Avenue; it is the oldest structure in Mill Valley.The San Francisco Savings & Union Bank organized the Land & Water Company in 1889 as an agency for disposing of the Richardson land gained from the Throckmorton debt. The Board of Directors was President Eastland, Secretary Louis L. Janes (Janes Street), Thomas Magee (Magee Avenue), Albert Miller (Miller Avenue), and Lovell White (Lovell Avenue).(http://mill-valley.freemasonry.biz/history/mill-valley-town.htm) Eastland, who had been president of the North Pacific Coast Railroad in 1877 and retained an interest, pushed to extend the railroad into the area in 1889.  Though Reed, Richardson, and the Cushings were crucial to bringing people to the Mill Valley area, it was Eastland who really propelled the area and set the foundation for the city today.  He had founded power companies all around the San Francisco Bay area, was on the board of several banks, and had control of several commercial companies.( The Tamalpais Land & Water Co. hired Michael M. OShaughnessy, already a noted engineer (later on he would become chief engineer for the Hetchy Reservoir and Dam and planned many San Francisco streets) to lay out roads, pedestrian paths, and step-systems for what the developers hoped would become a new city.  He also built the Cascade Dam & Reservoir for water supply, and set aside land plots for churches, schools, and parks. thumb|left|225px|altMill Valley pre-1900.|Mill Valley pre-1900. Courtesy of the Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Roomthumb|right|225px|altGravity car no. 21 on the Mt. Tam and Muir Woods Scenic Rwy c. 1915.|Gravity car no. 21 on the Mt. Tam and Muir Woods Scenic Rwy c. 1915. Courtesy of the Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Roomthumb|left|225px|altMill Valley 1910 postcard|Similar view of Mill Valley, circa 1910, as pictured on a souvenir postcard with the caption Mill Valley and Mount Tamalpais, Showing Crookedest Railroad, California.On 31 May 1890, nearly 3,000 people attended The Tamalpais Land & Water Co. land auction near the now-crumbling sawmill.  More than  were sold that day in the areas of present day Throckmorton, Cascade, Lovell, Summit, and Miller Avenues and extending to the west side of Corte Madera Avenue.  By 1892, there were two schools in the area and a few churches.( The auction also brought into Mill Valley architects, builders, and craftsmen.  A. Klyce was one of the most prominent of the architects and designed many private homes and public buildings in the area, including the Masonic Lodge in 1904.(http://mill-valley.freemasonry.biz/history/biographies.htm) Before his death in 1894, Eastland built a large summer home, Burlwood, constructed on Throckmorton Avenue in 1892 that still stands though much of the original land has been parceled off.  Burlwood was the first home in the town to have electricity, and when telephones were installed only he and Mrs. Cushing, the owner of the Blithedale Hotel had service.( After the land auctions the area was known as both Eastland and Mill Valley.(Durham, David L. (1998). Californias Geographic Names: A Gazetteer of Historic and Modern Names of the State. Quill Driver Books. p. 664. ISBN 9781884995149.)Janes, by then the resident director of Tamalpais Land & Water Co. (and eventually the citys first town clerk), and Sidney B. Cushing, president of the San Rafael Gas & Electric Co. set out to bring the railroads to Mt. Tamalpais.  The Mt. Tamalpais Scenic Railway opened in 1896 (with Cushing as President) and ran from the town center (present day Lytton Square) all the way to the summit.  After Woods became a national monument in 1908 the railroad expanded and became the Mt. Tamalpais & Muir Woods Scenic Railway. The Crookedest Railroad in the World and its accompanying Gravity Cars(http://www.mttam.net/Default.aspx?tabid828) brought thousands of tourists to the Tavern of Tamalpais on the mountain summit (built in 1896, rebuilt after the 1929 fire, and razed in the 1950s after a windstorm),(http://www.co.marin.ca.us/depts/lb/main/crm/photoalbums/railroadalbum/railroad1.html) the West Point Inn (built in 1904, abandoned in the 1930s, reopened in 1943),(http://www.westpointinn.com/about.htm) and the Muir Woods Inn (burned in 1907, rebuilt in 1914, now closed).(http://www.co.marin.ca.us/depts/lb/main/crm/photoalbums/railroadalbum/muirinn.html) The tracks were removed in 1930 after the 1929 fire, the drop in tourism due to the Depression, and the increase in automobile traffic with the construction of the Panoramic Highway and other roads caused a drastic drop in ridership.  Train service also became a reliable and relatively cheap form of commuting and tracks crisscrossed Mill Valley and connected it with neighboring cities and San Francisco.Incorporation through WWIIthumb|left|225px|altVolunteer firemen in action during the July 4th-6th 1929 fire on Mt. Tamalpais.|Volunteer firemen in action during the July 4th-6th 1929 fire on Mt. Tamalpais. Courtesy of the Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History RoomBy 1900, the population was nearing 900 and the locals pushed out the Tamalpais Land & Water Co. in favor of incorporation. Organizations and clubs cropped up including the Outdoor Art Club (1902)(http://www.theoutdoorartclub.org/) and the Race (1905), the latter marking its 100th anniversary in 2010.(http://www.dipsea.org/) The second big population boom came after the 1906 Great Earthquake.  While much of San Francisco and Marin County was devastated, many fled to Mill Valley and most never left.  In that year alone the population grew to over 1,000 permanent residents.(http://www.sfgenealogy.com/marin/ourtowns/ot_mv.htm) Creeks were bridged over or dammed, more roads laid down and oiled, and cement sidewalks poured.  High School opened in 1908, the first city hall was erected in 1908, and Andrew Carnegies library in 1910.  The Post Office opened under the name Eastland, however after many objections it was changed to Mill Valley in 1904.( The very first Play was performed at the Mountain Theater on Mt. Tam in 1913.(http://www.mountainplay.org/about.html)By the 1920s, most roads were paved over, mail delivery was in full swing, and the population was at its highest at more than 2,500 citizens.  Mill Valley Italian settlers made wine during Prohibition, while some local bar owners made bootleg whiskey under the dense foliage around the local creeks.(Mill Valley Historical Society Spring 2000 Review) January 1922 saw the first of several years of snow in Marin County, coating Mt. Tam white.  Two years later the Sulphur Springs, a natural hot spring where locals could revive their lagging spirits, was covered over and turned in the playground of the Old Mill Elementary School.  thumb|right|225px|altThe Mountain Theater under construction by the CCC c. 1937-1940.|The Mountain Theater under construction by the CCC c. 1937-1940. Courtesy of the Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Room 1929 was a year of great change for Mill Valley.  The Great Fire raged for several days in early July and nearly destroyed the fledgling city.  It ravaged much of Mt. Tam (including the Tavern and 117 homes) and the city itself was spared only by a change in wind direction.( In October of that year, the Mt. Tamalpais and Muir Woods Scenic Railway ran for the last time.  The fire caused great devastation to tourism and tourist destinations, but the railroads were also crushed by the car.  Panoramic Highway, a section of Highway 1 running between Mill Valley and Stinson Beach was built in 1929-1930.  The stock market crash of 1929 and the ensuing Depression crippled what little railroad tourism there was to the point where the tracks were eventually taken up in 1931.During the Great Depression, many famous local landmarks were constructed with the help of the Progress Administration and the Conservation Corps, including the Mead Theater at Tam High(named after school board Trustee Ernest Mead), the Mountain Theater rock seating, and the Golden Gate Bridge in 1934-1937;( the latter event ended railroad commuting between Marin and the city and helped increase the Marin population.  With the demise of the railroads came the introduction of local bus service.  Greyhound moved into the former train depot in Lytton Square in October 1940.  In Sausalito, Marinship brought over 75,000 people to Marin, many of whom moved to Mill Valley permanently. At the height of the War, nearly 400 locals were fighting, including many volunteer firemen and government officials.  By 1950, 1 in 10 Mill Valleyans were living in a Goheen Home.  C. Goheen built the so-called defense homes for defense workers throughout the 1940s and 1950s in the Alto neighborhood.(1950s to presentthumb|left|225px|altThe corner of Throckmorton Ave. and Corte Madera Ave. c. 1970.|The corner of Throckmorton Ave. and Corte Madera Ave. c. 1970. Courtesy of the Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History Room With a population just over 7,000 by 1950,( Mill Valley was still relatively rural.  Men commuted to San Francisco on the Greyhound bus when the streets were not flooding in heavy rain, and there still were not any traffic lights.  The military built the Valley Air Force Station to protect the area during the War.  In 1956, a group of Beat poets and writers lived briefly in the Perry house, most notably Kerouac and Francisco Renaissance Beat poet Gary Snyder.  The house and its land is now owned by the Marin County Open Space District.  By the beginning of the 1960s, however, the population swelled. The Mill Valley Fall Arts Festival became a permanent annual event and the old Carnegie library was replaced with an award-winning library at 375 Throckmorton Ave.  Designed by architect Donn Emmons, the new library was formally dedicated on September 18, 1966.(http://www.millvalleylibrary.org/Index.aspx?page624)The 1970s saw a change in attitude and population.  Mill Valley became an area associated with great wealth, with many people making their millions in San Francisco and moving north.  New schools and neighborhoods cropped up, though the city maintained its defense of redwoods and protected open space.  thumb|right|225px|altMiller Ave. toward Mt. Tamalpais in the 1990s.|Miller Ave. toward Mt. Tamalpais in the 1990s. Courtesy of the Mill Valley Public Library, Lucretia Little History RoomCascade Dam, built in 1893, was closed in 1972 and drained four years later in an attempt to curb the hordes of young people using the reservoir for nude sunbathing and swimming.  Youth subculture would come under attack again in 1974 when the City Council banned live music, first at the Sweetwater and later at the Old Mill Tavern, both now defunct.( In 1977, the Lucretia Hanson Little History Room in the library opened and became the base of operations for the Mill Valley Historical Society.  Marin County was hit with one of the worst droughts on record beginning in 1976 and peaking in 1977, brought on by a combination of several seasons of low rainfall and a refusal to import water from the Russian River, instead relying solely on rain water from Mt. Tam and the West Marin watersheds to fill the then-six reservoirs.  By June 1977, the County managed to pipe in water from the River Delta, staving off disaster.  The rainfall during the winter of 1977-78 was one of the heaviest on record.(http://www.marinmagazine.com/Marin-Magazine/March-2007/When-Marin-Went-Dry/) The Valley Film Festival, now part of the Film Institute, began in 1978 at the Sequoia Theatre.The 1980s and 1990s saw the decline of small businesses in Mill Valley.  Local establishments like Lockwoods Pharmacy closed in 1981 after running almost continuously for 86 years.  Old Mill Tavern, OLearys, and the Unknown Museum shut their doors, as did Red Cart Market and Tamalpais Hardware.  In their places came boutiques, upscale clothing stores, coffee shops, art galleries, and gourmet grocery stores.  Downtown Plaza and Lytton Square were remodled to fit the new attitude.  The population in the city alone swelled over 13,000 and many of the old, narrow, winding streets grew clogged with traffic congestion.( The Public Library expanded with a new Childrens Room, a downstairs Fiction Room, and Internet computers.(http://www.millvalleylibrary.org/Index.aspx?page627) It also joined MARINet, a consortium of all the public libraries in Marin, to allow patrons greater access to information.  MARINet now has an online catalogue of all the materials, both physical and electronic, in the Marin public libraries, which patrons can order, pick up, and drop off materials at any of the participating libraries.(http://marinet.lib.ca.us/) The Old Mill also got a face lift; it was rebuilt to the same specifications of the original in 1991.  The 1990s also saw another influx of affluence.  Many new homeowners gutted homes built in the 19th and early 20th centuries, or tore them down all together.The dawn of the new millennium brought reflection on the past, as the city celebrated 100 years of incorporation.  Soon after Mill Valley got its brand new Community Center at 180 Camino Alto,(http://www.cityofmillvalley.org/Index.aspx?page69) adjacent to Valley Middle School.  On January 31, 2008, Mill Valleys sewage treatment plant spilled 2.45 million gallons of sewage into the San Francisco Bay.(http://www.marinij.com/marin/ci_8182853) This marked the second such spill in Mill Valley within a week (the previous one spilled 2.7 million gallons), and the most recent of several that occurred in Marin County in early 2008.(http://www.marinij.com/ci_8364890?sourcemost_viewed) Mill Valleys treatment plant attributed the spills to human error.( The spills caused distress in Mill Valleys administrative government, which remains outspoken about dedicating itself to the protection of air quality, waste reduction, water and energy conservation, and the protection of wildlife and habitat in Mill Valley.(http://www.cityofmillvalley.org/Index.aspx?page675)GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau the city has a total area of , of which  is land and  of (1.74%) water.The Mill Valley 94941 area lies between Mt. Tamalpais on the west, the city of Tiburon on the east,the City of Corte Madera on the north, and the Golden Gate National Recreational Area (GGNRA) on the south. Two streams flow from the slopes of Mt. Tamalpais through Mill Valley to the bay: the Arroyo Corte Madera del Presidio; and Cascade Creek. Mill Valley is surrounded by hundreds of acres (hectares) of state, federal, and county park lands.  In addition, there are many municipally maintained open-space reserves, parks, and coastal habitats which, when taken together, ensconce Mill Valley in a natural wilderness.  This close and constant proximity to nature has left generations of Mill Valley residents with a strong sense of conservancy toward much of this natural environment.  This unique cultural attitude, along with the many natural public spaces preserved within (see below) and around its borders, combine to form one of the main cultural cornerstones that has always defined Mill Valley.Mill Valley has a number of scenic and natural features which provides significant habitat for fishes, marine mammals, and other biota.  Notable areas of public access to experience these aquatic preserves can be found at:* Bayfront Park and Bothin Marsh Open Space Preserve* Elizabeth Terwilliger MarshMill Valley and the Homestead Valley Land Trust maintains many minimally disturbed wildland areas and preserves which are open to the public from sunrise to dusk everyday.  Several nature trails allow access as well as providing gateway access to neighboring state and federal park lands, and the Mt. Tamalpais Watershed(http://www.marinwater.org/controller?actionmenuclick&id242) wildland on the broad eastern face of Mt. Tamalpais that overlooks Mill Valley.  These are undeveloped natural areas and contain many species of wild animals, including some large predators like the coyote, the bobcat, and the cougar.  As in all wildland areas, observe daytime access hours, keep dogs on leashes, and keep younger children from wandering about unattended.  One may also want to familiarize themselves with how to live and recreate among cougars, coyotes, and bobcats prior to visiting these wildland areas.* Cascade Falls ParkA natural forested park that spans an area between the western stretches of Cascade Drive and Lovell Ave.* Blithedale Summit Open Space Preservelocated up West Blithdale Ave.* Tennessee Valleylocated in Tamalpais Valley, off Shoreline Highway* Alto Bowl Open Space Preservelocated  up Camino Alto* Camino Alto Open Space Preservelocated 1/2 mile (800 m) up Camino Alto, up Overhill Rd.Climatethumb|right|250px|Old Railroad DepotMill Valley has a mild climate which results in relatively wet winters and very dry summers. Winter lows rarely drop below freezing and summer highs rarely peak  with 90% of the annual rain falling in November through March. Wind speeds average lower than national averages in winter months and higher in summer, and often become quite gusty in the canyon regions of town.  California coastal fog often affects Mill Valley, making relative humidity highly variable.  The wetter winter months tend to make for a more consistent daily relative humidity around 70-90% (slightly higher than US averages).  During the summer months, however, while the morning fog often keeps morning humidity normal, in a typical 70-80% range, by afternoon after the fog burns off, the humidity regularly plummets to around 30% as one would expect in this dry seasonal climate.(http://www.city-data.com/city/Mill-Valley-California.html See Average climate in Mill Valley, California graphs.)Mill Valley is also affected by microclimate conditions in the several box canyons with steep north-facing slopes and dense forests which span the southern and western city limits, which, along with the coastal fog, all conspire to make many of the dense forested regions of Mill Valley noticeably cooler and moister, on average, than other regions of town.  This microclimate is what makes for the favorable ecology required by the Coastal Redwood forests which still cover much of the town and surrounding area, and have played such a pivotal role throughout the history of Mill Valley.Demographics2010The United States Census() reported that Mill Valley had a population of 13,903. The density was 2,868.2 people per square mile (1,107.4/km). The racial makeup of Mill Valley was 12,341 (88.8%) White, 118 (0.8%) African American, 23 (0.2%) Native American, 755 (5.4%) Asian, 14 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 152 (1.1%) from other races, and 500 (3.6%) from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino of any race were 622 persons (4.5%).The Census reported that 99.5% of the population lived in households and 0.5% were institutionalized.There were 6,084 households, out of which 1,887 (31.0%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 2,984 (49.0%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 465 (7.6%) had a female householder with no husband present, 178 (2.9%) had a male householder with no wife present.  There were 306 (5.0%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 55 (0.9%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 2,016 households (33.1%) were made up of individuals and 888 (14.6%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.27.  There were 3,627 families (59.6% of all households); the average family size was 2.94.The population was spread out with 3,291 people (23.7%) under the age of 18, 459 people (3.3%) aged 18 to 24, 2,816 people (20.3%) aged 25 to 44, 4,714 people (33.9%) aged 45 to 64, and 2,623 people (18.9%) who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 46.6 years. For every 100 females there were 85.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 80.8 males.There were 6,534 housing units at an average density of 1,348.0 per square mile (520.4/km), of which 3,974 (65.3%) were owner-occupied, and 2,110 (34.7%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.2%; the rental vacancy rate was 4.5%.  9,861 people (70.9% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 3,966 people (28.5%) lived in rental housing units.2000At the 2000 census, there were 13,600 people, 6,147 households and 3,417 families residing in the city, not including those living in unincorporated territories. The density was 2,883.1 inhabitants per square mile (1,112.5/km). There were 6,286 housing units at an average density of 1,332.6 per square mile (514.2/km). The racial makeup of the city in 2010 was 85.8% non-Hispanic White, 0.8% non-Hispanic African American, 0.1% Native American, 5.3% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.3% from other races, and 3.1% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 4.5% of the population.There were 6,147 households of which 27.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.2% were married couples living together, 7.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 44.4% were non-families. 34.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.20 and the average family size was 2.85.21.2% of the population was under the age of 18, 2.9% from 18 to 24, 28.1% from 25 to 44, 32.5% from 45 to 64, and 15.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 44 years. For every 100 females there were 86.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.5 males.The household income was $90,794, and the median family income was $119,669. Males had a median income of $94,800 versus $52,088 for females. The capita income for the city was $64,179. About 2.7% of families and 4.5% of the population were below the line, including 3.6% of those under age 18 and 5.7% of those age 65 or over. The median single-family home price in the city was $1,500,000 in January 2005.Cityscapethumb|right|220px|Mount Carmel Catholic ChurchThe combination of Mill Valleys idyllic location nestled beneath Tamalpais coupled with its ease of access to nearby Francisco has made it a popular home for many high-income commuters. Over the last 20 years, following a trend that is endemic throughout the Area, home prices have climbed in Mill Valley (the median price for a single-family home is in excess of $1.5 million as of 2005), which has had the effect of pushing out some earlier residents who can no longer afford to live in the area.  This trend has also transformed Mill Valleys commercial activity, e.g. Village Music (see below) was replaced in 2008 by more luxury-oriented commercial establishments: a cupcake shop and a dog salon.In July 2005, CNN/Money and Money magazine ranked Mill Valley tenth on its list of the 100 Best Places to Live in the United States.()  In 2007, MSN and Forbes magazine ranked Mill Valley seventy-third on its Most expensive zip codes in America list.(http://moneycentral.msn.com/content/invest/forbes/P62020.asp/)While Mill Valley has retained elements of its earlier artistic culture through galleries, festivals, and performances, its stock of affordable housing has diminished,(http://www.marinij.com/fastsearchresults/ci_4355908) forcing some residents to leave the area. This trend has also affected some of the citys well-known cultural centers like Village Music.(http://www.marinij.com/fastsearchresults/ci_4910289) and the Saloon. As of April 2007, only one affordable housing project was underway: an initiative to raze and rebuild an abandoned motel called the Fireside.(http://www.marinij.com/fastsearchresults//ci_3981677)Neighborhoods and unincorporated CDPsStrawberry is an unincorporated Place to the east of the City of Mill Valley.  Other CDPs with Mill Valley mailing addresses include Valley and Muir Beach.  Smaller unincorporated areas include Alto and Almonte.Neighborhoods in Mill Valley:City recreational parksMill Valley maintains many recreational parks which often contain playgrounds and other designated areas specifically designed for playing various sports.  Dogs are required to be on leashes in all but one of these parks, which is specifically designated a dog park to allow the option of off-leash exercise(http://www.cityofmillvalley.org/Index.aspx?page416).Mill Valley has a costly but popular steps, lanes, and paths program that provides improved pedestrian access between many of the winding and twisting residential roads that cover the hillsides.  Blue stencils on the roadway mark certain paths as potential emergency escape routes from the fire prone hills.  A picture book, although not entirely accurately, shows the paths, Steps, Lanes and Paths of Mill Valley(). In 2009 resident Matt Connelly threatened litigation alleging that some of the proposed paths represent a seizure of private property (even though some antique maps suggest that certain potential easements could be thought of as the justification for future steps, lanes, or paths).(http://www.cityofmillvalley.org/Modules/ShowDocument.aspx?documentid3770).  The very limited amount of usage of some of the newer paths suggests that the over $1,000,000 spent on these paths could be argued to be excessive.For those who prefer to enjoy nature from the comfort of a chair, the citys public library(http://www.millvalleylibrary.org/) is nestled in a serene and scenic location at the edge of Old Mill Park(http://justplaygrounds.com/play/millValley/oldMill/index.htm) where visitors may relax indoors near the wood-burning fireplace and view the redwood forest through the librarys multi-storied windows, or from the outside deck which overlooks the park and Cascade Creek.Nature trailsthumb|right|250px|Blithedale Canyon* Tenderfoot Trail (1.5 miles) -- Lower trail head is on Cascade Drive between Cascade Falls park and the lower trail head of the Zigzag trail.  The upper trail head is at Edgewood Ave., near Mountain Home Inn. This upper trail head provides access to the Edgewood trail, and also provides gateway access to the upper region of Muir Woods, Tamalpais State Park near the Alice Eastwood Campsite access road, and the main southern access point Mt. Tamalpais Watershed (near the Throckmorton Ridge Fire Station).* Zigzag Trail (1/2 mile, steep climb) -- This is a very steep trail which has an upper trail head near the Throckmorton Ridge Fire Station and the Mountain Home Inn with gateway access to the upper region of Muir Woods, Tamalpais State Park near the Alice Eastwood Campsite access road, and the main southern access point Mt. Tamalpais Watershed (near the Throckmorton Ridge Fire Station).  The lower trail head is near the western end of Cascade Drive, west of Cascade Falls Park and the lower Tenderfoot Trail head.* Cypress Trail (1 mile) -- runs between the end of Cypress Ave. and the middle of the Tenderfoot Trail.  Cypress Avenue leads to Edgewood Blvd. Going down Edgewood leads to the top of Dipsea trail stairs and Cowboy Rock Trail head, and uphill on Edgewood lead to the Edgewood Trail.* Edgewood Trail (1/2 mile)(aka Pipeline trail) -- runs between the two parts of Edgewood Ave. and provides access to the upper Tenderfoot trail head or, if one follows Edgewood Ave. out to the Mountain Home Inn, leads to a gateway access  to the upper region of Muir Woods, Tamalpais State Park near the Alice Eastwood Campsite access road, and the main southern access point Mt. Tamalpais Watershed (near the Throckmorton Ridge Fire Station)* Cowboy Rock Trail (1/4 mile) -- part of the Homestead Valley Land Trust, the upper trail head is at Edgewood and Sequoia Valley Road intersection, across the street from where the Dipsea trail stairs from downtown end.  This path leads to the Homestead Trail and to the path/stairs down to Stolte Grove and the western tip of Homestead Valley.* Pixie Trail (1/2 mile) -- part of the Homestead Valley Land Trust, this trail has several trail heads.  On the upper end the trail head is at Marion Ave, (upper portion) Ridgewood Ave., and Edgewood Ave. intersect.  The Pixie Trail also has a mid-access point, where the Pixie Trail becomes paved and developed.  The street runs down hill to Stolte Grove.  The trail continues on and connects to any of three other trail heads.  The first head is at the five way intersection of Molino Ave, Edgewood Ave, Cape Ct, and Mirabel Ave.  The second head leads to the end of Seymour lane which is a short road off of Edgewood Ave.  Crossing Edgewood, the path continues down a set of stairs to Ethel Ave and the Una Way staircase down to Miller Ave.  The third and final head ends at Janes Street, down the way from Molino Avenue Park.* Homestead Trail (1 mile) -- part of the Homestead Valley Land trust, this longer winding trail traverses the western slope of Homestead Valley itself.  It is not well delineated or maintained in parts.  It has several other trail heads that leads up into Tamalpais State Park near the four-corners intersection, as well as down into the valley via (lower portion) Ridgeview Ave. and Ferndale Ave.*Dipsea Trail (7.1 miles) The most famous hike in Marin County is the Dipsea Trail, a challenging route beginning with three long, steep stairways leading up from Old Mill Park and ending at Stinson Beach  later. The annual Race  is in June, although the trail can be run or hiked any time. The West Marin Stagecoach is a bus that runs from Stinson Beach back to Mill Valley, stopping approximately one mile from downtown.http://www.marintransit.org/local.html The Dipsea Trail is not well marked, so first timers should consider carrying a guidebook.*Muir Woods to Bootjack Trail (6.3 miles) This trail is a loop that will take around 3.5 hours and popular among tourists due to the first hour among the redwood trees. Bootjack is accessible from here, transitioning to meadows with bridges and streams. Bootjack itself is  long, moderate uphill and great for the average hiker.EducationPublic schoolsFile:Tams Arch & Tower at Dusk, Summer 2006.jpg|thumb|High SchoolPublic schools are managed by the Valley School District. There are five elementary schools and one middle school, Valley Middle School, a four-time winner of the Distinguished School Award.(California School Recognition Program distinguished school honorees, accessed January 26, 2008 ) The public high school, High School, is part of the Union High School District, whose five campuses serve central and southern County.  Marin Horizon School is an school serving students in grades PK-8. Founded in 1977, the school enrolls approximately 285 students.Mill Valley Public LibraryThe municipal library overlooks Old Mill Park and provides many picturesque reading locations, as well as free computer and Internet access.  Recently they have begun offering Museum Passes to 94941 residents for free entry to Bay Area museums.(http://www.millvalleylibrary.org/Index.aspx?page867) As part of the City of Mill Valleys decision to go Green, the library has a Sustainability Collection with books and DVDs with information about how to become more environmentally friendly.(http://marinet.lib.ca.us/search~S3?/dSustainability+Collection+--+Mill+Valley/dsustainability+collection+mill+valley/-3%2C-1%2C0%2CB/exact&FFdsustainability+collection+mill+valley&1%2C80%2C)The Mill Valley Public Library is also home to the Lucretia Hanson Little History Room.  It has thousands of books, photographs, newspapers, pamphlets, artifacts, and oral histories on the history of California, Marin County, and Mill Valley.(http://www.millvalleylibrary.org/Index.aspx?page712) It is staffed almost entirely by volunteers.(http://www.millvalleylibrary.org/Index.aspx?page516) As of 2009, the History Room is in the midst of a digitization project wherein all documents are being scanned and digitized.  Eventually the History Room will have all of their documents and artifacts available for public perusal on an online database.  It also has a Twitter account, @MVHistoryRoom where updates, historical information, and new acquisitions are posted.Annual eventsMill Valley is the home of several annual events, many of which attract national and international followings:*Race(http://www.dipsea.org)*The Mountain Play(http://www.mountainplay.org)*Valley Film Festival(http://www.mvff.com)*Mill Valley Fall Arts Festival(http://www.mvfaf.org)*Mill Valley Shakespeare in Old Mill Park Amphitheater(http://curtaintheatre.org/)Arts and crafts in Mill ValleyMill Valley is known for being a village with a strong artistic heritage. A visitor to downtown Mill Valley will discover many art galleries, open-air coffee shops, and other hallmarks of a thriving artistic community.   In addition, the town has sponsored the Mill Valley Fall Arts Festival for over fifty years and also the Valley Film Festival, which is part of the Film Institute, for over thirty years.  In addition, Mill Valleys Chamber of Commerce has sponsored the annual Gourmet Food and Wine Tasting in Lytton Square for many years.Theater arts also have a huge following in Mill Valley.  In addition to supporting the local 142 Throckmorton Theatre, which hosts theater of all levels, Mill Valley is also home for the Marin Theatre Company, and the Mountain Play Association which hosts annual musical productions in the Sidney B. Cushing Amphitheater located in Mill Valleys neighboring Tamalpais State Park. For several years the Curtain Theatre Group has also been performing annual free Shakespeare plays among the redwoods on the Old Mill Park Amphitheatre behind the Mill Valley Library.Music, novels, television and moviesMill Valley has also been home to many musicians, authors, actors, and TV personalities.  Garcia  who recorded music in a Mill Valley recording studio  also once called Mill Valley home. Lennon and Ono summered in a Mill Valley home on Lovell Ave. near the library in the early 1970s, having left some of his own graffiti on the wall of the residence The Maya the Merrier. Other rock stars such as Michael Bloomfield, Lewis, Weir, Michaels, Hagar, Raitt, Sears, Clemons, John and Mario Cipollina, and Joplin have also called this small town home. The composer Anthony Lennon was raised in Mill Valley. Authors such as Morris and London have also lived here, as does Maynard. Actors Coyote, Carvey, Eikenberry, Quinlan, Michael Tucker, and it was the place of birth for actors Arden, Hemingway and Hill. Celebrity chef Florence, Animation Studios Stanton and former womens basketball star Azzi also call Mill Valley home. Former naval aviator Dengler built a home on Mount Tamalpais near the Mountain Home Inn and lived there until his death in 2001; parts of the biographical documentary about him, Dieter Needs to Fly were filmed there. Author John Gray who writes the are from Mars, Women are from Venus books is a long time Mill Valley resident. Preventive medicine physician, John Travis, founded the first wellness center in the US at 42 Miller Avenue in 1975.In fiction, character Hunnicutt from the TV show M*A*S*H called Mill Valley home, and fictional character Charley Furuseth in Jack Londons 1904 novel Sea-Wolf, apparently had a summer cottage here.  In the Trek universe, it is home to the 602 Club. It is also the setting for resident author Jack Finneys 1954 novel Body Snatchers, although the 1956 film, Invasion of the Body Snatchers, and subsequent movie versions of the book have been set elsewhere.  Fictional character Doris Martin from the TV show Doris Day Show called Mill Valley home as well. In the syndicated version of Too Close For Comfort, Henry and Muriel Rush got their jobs at the Marin Bugler newspaper in Mill Valley.Writer Kerouac and beat poet Snyder shared a Mill Valley cabin in 1955-56(http://content.cdlib.org/view?docIdtf1489n5dm&chunk.idbioghist-1.8.3&brandoac) around 370 Montford Ave. in Homestead Valley.  The cabins coincidental location in Marin County and its adjacent location to a meadow where horses grazed, combined with Snyders expertise in Asian languages and cultures, lead to Snyder naming the cabin Marin-An, which is Japanese for Horse Grove Hermitage.( It was during this stay in Mill Valley that Kerouacs recent budding interest in Buddhism was greatly expanded by Snyders expertise in the subject.  Kerouacs 1958 novel, Dharma Bums, was consequently composed while living here and contains many semi-fictionalized accounts of the lives of Kerouac and Snyder while living at Marin-An.(http://www.millvalleyhistoricalsociety.org/history-of-homestead-valley-2002.html)American writer McFadden, while living in Mill Valley in the 1970s, wrote a column for the Pacific Sun newspaper entitled, The Serial, which satirized the trendy lifestyles of the affluent residents of Marin County.(http://www.pacificsun.com/morguepdf/2007/2007_06_29.pac.section1.pdf p.9) In 1977, she turned her column ideas into a novel called Serial: A Year in the Life of Marin County which focused on the fictional exploits of a Mill Valley couple, Kate and Harvey Holroyd, who never quite fit in to the Marin Scene.  The highly successful book was later made into a 1980 comedy called Serial, starring Weld and Mull.The song Mill Valley, recorded in 1970 and released on the album Miss Abrams and the Strawberry Point 4th Grade Class,(http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/detail/-/B00004SGY5) reached #90 on the Hot 100.(Mill Valley Chart History, Billboard.com.) While the school is in the Mill Valley School District, it is not within the city limits.Laymon, the American horror author, set his novel The Lake primarily in Mill Valley. Other Laymon novels are also either set in or mention Mill Valley.The High School Marching Band appeared in the 1969 Allen film The Money and Run.  In the 1973 Lucas film Graffiti, the sock hop dance scenes were filmed in the high schools boys gymnasium.The television show Quantum Leap filmed episode 406 in Mill Valley in 1991.A now defunct band named Yoyos resided in Mill Valley, and named one of their albums after the town.(http://www.scenepointblank.com/reviews/1056)In March 2009, the pilot for NBCs Parenthood filmed a few scenes at Boyle Park.Mill Valley in the news1974: Jenny Fulle first girl to play Little LeagueLeague Baseball specifically banned girls from participating in 1951 and had successfully defended this gender discrimination many times in court. In 1972, President Nixon signed IX into law, which prohibited gender discrimination in any area of education. Since Little League depended upon public school facilities for practice and games, Title IX made the boys-only policy illegal. Jenny Fulle of Mill Valley was first banned from playing Little League upon registration in 1973, but after her was written about in the Mill Valley Record, it quickly attracted national attention and the support of Organization for Women and the Civil Liberties Union. In 1974, Jenny Fulle won a superior court ruling under Title IX which allowed her to become the first girl in the nation to play Little League. In 1975, the year after she played her first season, Little League permanently changed its national policy, allowing girls to participate.(http://licensetothrive.org/leader/detail/id/45)(http://www.thefreelibrary.com/A+hero%27s+journey:+Jenny+Fulle+has+led+a+charmed+life+of+her+own...-a0159593365 A Heros Journey: Jenny Fulle...)Points of interestImage:Mvafs.JPG|thumb|250px|right|Valley Air Force Station*Woods(http://www.nps.gov/muwo/)*Tamalpais(http://www.parks.ca.gov/pages/471/files/mounttamalpais.pdf)*Botanic Garden*Bay*Gate Baptist Theological Seminary*Saloon - Evicted from its 30 year home in September 2007*Valley School District*High School*Old Mill School*142 Throckmorton Theatre*Valley Air Force Station*Mill Valley Masonic Events Center*Mill Valley Islamic CenterSee also*of people from Marin County, CaliforniaReferencesExternal links*Mill Valley Public Library*Lucretia Hanson Little History Room*City of Mill Valley*Mill Valley Historical Society*Mill Valley Masonic Lodge*Mill Valley Fall Arts Festival*California Film Institute (CFI)*Mill Valley Film Festival*Marin Theatre Company*Mountain Play Association*Curtain Theatre Shakespeare in the Park*Mill Valley Chamber of Commerce*The Dipsea Race*Tamalpais Community Services District (T.C.S.D.)*Tamalpais Valley Community Center (T.C.C.)*Homestead Valley Community Association (H.V.C.A.)ValleyValleyValley (California)ValleyValley, CaliforniaValley (California)Valley, KalifniValleyValleyValleyValley, CaliforniaValley
107882
La_Porte,_California
website                   La Porte is a place (CDP) in Plumas County, California, States. The population was 26 at the 2010 census, down from 43 at the 2000 census.GeographyLa Porte is located at  (39.681908, -120.984732).According to the States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all of it land.Demographics2010The United States Census() reported that La Porte had a population of 26. The density was 5.8 people per square mile (2.3/km). The racial makeup of La Porte was 24 (92.3%) White, 1 (3.8%) African American, 1 (3.8%) Native American, 0 (0.0%) Asian, 0 (0.0%) Pacific Islander, 0 (0.0%) from other races, and 0 (0.0%) from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0 persons (0.0%). The Census reported that 26 people (100% of the population) lived in households, 0 (0%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 0 (0%) were institutionalized.  There were 15 households, out of which 3 (20.0%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 7 (46.7%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 1 (6.7%) had a female householder with no husband present, 0 (0%) had a male householder with no wife present.  There were 0 (0%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 0 (0%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 7 households (46.7%) were made up of individuals and 3 (20.0%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.73.  There were 8 families (53.3% of all households); the average family size was 2.38.The population was spread out with 4 people (15.4%) under the age of 18, 0 people (0%) aged 18 to 24, 3 people (11.5%) aged 25 to 44, 13 people (50.0%) aged 45 to 64, and 6 people (23.1%) who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 56.0 years. For every 100 females there were 100.0 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 100.0 males.There were 145 housing units at an average density of 32.5 per square mile (12.6/km), of which 10 (66.7%) were owner-occupied, and 5 (33.3%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 16.7%; the rental vacancy rate was 0%.  17 people (65.4% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 9 people (34.6%) lived in rental housing units.2000As of the census of 2000, there were 43 people, 28 households, and 12 families residing in the CDP. The density was 9.6 people per square mile (3.7/km). There were 131 housing units at an average density of 29.2 per square mile (11.3/km). The racial makeup of the CDP was 95.35% White, 2.33% Native American, and 2.33% from two or more races. 0.00% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 28 households out of which 3.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 39.3% were married couples living together, and 53.6% were non-families. 50.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 25.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.54 and the average family size was 2.08.In the CDP the population was spread out with 4.7% under the age of 18, 2.3% from 18 to 24, 2.3% from 25 to 44, 53.5% from 45 to 64, and 37.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 60 years. For every 100 females there were 186.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 173.3 males.The median income for a household in the CDP was $30,781, and the median income for a family was $11,250. Males had a median income of $12,083 versus $0 for females. The capita income for the CDP was $18,258. There were 100.0% of families and 65.0% of the population living below the line, including 100.0% of under eighteens and none of those over 64.Little Grass Valley Reservoirthumb|right|Little Grass Valley Reservoir as seen from atop nearby Bald MountainCompleted in 1961, the nearby rock-fill reservoir Little Grass Valley is a popular summer water sports area.  Nearby hiking and OHV trails also surround the lake.PoliticsIn the state legislature La Porte is located in the 1st Senate District, represented by Republican Cox, and in the 3rd Assembly District, represented by Republican Logue. Federally, La Porte is located in 4th congressional district, which has a Cook PVI of R +11() and is represented by Republican Doolittle.Howland Flat and Poker Flatthumb|right|The 1886 Scott home at Poker FlatAbout 12 miles outside La Porte via the Port Wine Ridge Road lies the remains of the former mining town Howland Flat.  Another few miles along the Poker flat OHV trail is the former town of Poker Flat, where the 1886 Scott Home still stands as one of the few remaining structures.ReferencesPorte (Califrnia)Porte (California)Porte (Californi)Porte (Califrnia)Porte (California)
108010
Ontario,_California
footnotes Ontario is a city located in Bernardino County, California, States. As of the 2010 Census, the city had a population of 163,924, down from 170,373 at the 2000 census, making it the countys fourth most populous city after San Bernardino, Fontana, and Rancho Cucamonga.The city is home to the International Airport which is the 15th busiest cargo airport in the United States. Ontario handles the mass of freight traffic between the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach and the rest of the country.(Ontario: Inland Empire Urban Center) It is also the home of  Mills and former home of the Motor Speedway.It takes its name from the Ontario Model Colony development established in 1882 by the Canadian engineer Chaffey and his brothers Chaffey and Charles Chaffey.(History of Ontario Retrieved 2010-05-12.) They named the settlement after their home province of Ontario, Canada.HistoryThe area that is now Ontario was part of the lands used for hunting and foraging by the semi-nomadic Tongva Serrano (Gabrieleo) Indians, who were known to roam as far south as the western San Bernardino Mountains. At the time of Mexican and later of American settlement, active Native American settlements were scattered across the entire valley. Remains of a Serrano village were discovered in the neighboring foothills of the present-day city of Claremont.Bautista de Anza friend of the land owner of Rancho Cucamonga at Township 1 South Range 7 West, Tapia, leaving him the assistance of the Cahuilla Indians from Anza, whom were under no control of any Spanish establishments. Other than the street and middle school named after De Anza, the only other artifact representing this expedition of De Anza and the Cahullia Tribe is a structure (still standing at 1007 East Main Street in the citys current Quiet Home Acquisition Project Area) and is not currently recognized for its significance. Following the 1819 establishment of Bernardino Asistencia, which may have served as an outpost of the San Gabriel mission, it became part of a large, vaguely identified area called San Antonio.In 1826, Smith passed through what is now Upland on the first overland journey to the West coast of North America via the Old Trails Highway (present-day Foothill Blvd).The 1834 secularization of California land holdings resulted in the lands transferral to private hands. In 1881, the Chaffey brothers purchased the land (which at that time also included the present-day city of Upland) and the water rights to it. They engineered a drainage system channeling water from the foothills of Mount Baldy down to the flatter lands below that performed the dual functions of allowing farmers to water their crops and preventing the floods that periodically afflict them. They also created the main thoroughfare of Euclid Avenue (California Highway 83), with its distinctive wide lanes and grassy median. The new Model Colony (called so because it offered the perfect balance between agriculture and the urban comforts of schools, churches, and commerce) was originally conceived as a dry town, early deeds containing clauses forbidding the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages within the town. The two named the town Ontario because they originally hailed from Canada.Ontario attracted farmers (primarily citrus) and ailing Easterners seeking a drier climate. To impress visitors and potential settlers with the abundance of water in Ontario, a fountain was placed at the Southern Pacific railway station. It was turned on when passenger trains were approaching and frugally turned off again after their departure. The original Chaffey fountain, a simple spigot surrounded by a ring of white stones, was later replaced by the more ornate Frankish Fountain, an Art Nouveau creation now located outside the Ontario Museum of History and Art.Agriculture was vital to the early economy, and many street names recall this legacy. The Sunkist plant also remains as a living vestige of the citrus era. The Chaffey brothers left to found the settlements of Mildura, Australia and Renmark, Australia which met with varying  success. Charles Frankish continued their work at Ontario.Mining engineer John Tays refined the design of the novel mule car, used from 1887 for public transportation on Euclid Avenue to 24th Street. At that point, the two mules were loaded onto a platform at the rear of the car and allowed to ride, as gravity propelled the trolley back down the avenue to the downtown Ontario terminus. Soon replaced by an electric streetcar, the mule car is commemorated by a replica in an enclosure south of C Street on the Euclid Avenue median.Ontario was incorporated as a city in 1891, and North Ontario broke away in 1906, calling itself Upland. Ontario grew at an astronomical rate, increasing 10 times in the next half a century. The population of 20,000 in the 1960s again grew 10 times more by the year 2007. Ontario was viewed as an Iowa under Palm trees, with a solid Midwestern/Mid-American foundation, but it had a large German and Swiss community. Tens of thousands of European immigrants came to work in agriculture, and in the early 1900s the first Filipinos and Japanese farm laborers arrived, later to display nursery ownership skills.Ontario has over two centuries of Hispanic residents from the Californio period of Spanish colonial and Mexican rule in the 1840s, but the first wave of Mexican settlers was in the 1880s brought as workers in the railroad industry (see traquero) and another wave from the Revolution of the 1910s. Mexican Americans resided in the citys poorer southern side facing State Route 60 and Chino.EconomyFile:GraberOliveHouseVatRoom.JPG|thumb|right|250px|The olive vat room at Olive House in Ontario, California. In 1894, two years after planting olive trees in Ontario, C. C. Graber began selling vat cured olives from the pictured vat room in vats similar to the ones pictured. Graber Olive House is the oldest operating olive packer in the United States.File:Ontario Mills sign.jpg|thumb|right|250px|MillsIn the years following Ontarios founding, the economy was driven by its reputation as a health resort. Shortly thereafter, citrus farmers began taking advantage of Ontarios rocky soil to plant lemon and orange groves. Agricultural opportunities also attracted vintners and olive growers. The Olive House, which continues to produce olives, is a city historical landmark and one of the oldest institutions in Ontario. Dairy farming is also prevalent, as it continues to be in neighboring Chino.A major pre-war industry was the citys Electric plant that produced clothing irons. During and after War II, Ontario experienced a housing boom common to many suburbs. The expansion of the Southern California defense industry attracted many settlers to the city.Today, Ontario still has a manufacturing industry, the most notable of which is the Maglite corporation, which produces flashlights there. However, manufacturing has waned, and today Ontarios economy is dominated by service industries and warehousing. Much of southern Ontario still contains dairy farms and other agricultural farms. However, the area is currently under planning to be developed into a mixed-use area of residential homes, industrial and business parks, and town centers, collectively known as the New Model Colony.Ontario is also home to the Stars and Straps clothing company and to Shoes.Top employersAccording to the Citys 2009 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report,(City of Ontario CAFR) the top employers in the city are:Entertainment and performing artsthumb|250px|left|The Granada Theatre. Circa 1940Built in 1925, it was leased to West Coast Junior Theater and by the 1940s was part of Fox West Coast Theater chain. The Granada Theater was designed by noted architect L.A. Smith.Sportsthumb|right|260px|Ontario Reign LW#7 Todd JacksonThe Business Bank Arena is a sports arena which opened in late 2008. It is owned by Ontario, but is operated by Entertainment Group. It is an 11,000-seat multi-purpose arena, and is home to the Reign, a team in the ECHL. It is the largest enclosed arena in the Inland Empire.The first year Angeles Kings affiliate plays at the 9,736 -seat Citizens Business Bank Arena. Ontario has posted a respectable 5,207 per game average (5th) in a very crowded southern California entertainment market. Minor league teams often have to build a following with success over time, but Ontario Reign fans have offered strong support of this team right out of the gate.Ontario was recently announced as the host of the 2010 ECHL Allstar Game. Ontario joins Stockton (2008), Fresno (2006), and Bakersfield (2011) as California franchises hosting the leagues midseason showcase. The minor league ASG is expected to pump more than $1 million dollars into the local economy.TraditionsSince 1959, Ontario has placed three-dimensional nativity scenes from the life of Jesus on the median of Euclid Avenue during the Christmas season. The scenes, featuring statues by the sculptor Vargas, were challenged in the 1998 as a violation of church-state separation under the Constitution by atheist resident Patrick Greene, but the dispute was resolved when private organizations began funding the storage and labor involved in the set-up and maintenance of the scenery in its entirety.(chaffey.org)As means to support the nativity scenes the Ontario Chamber of Commerce started Christmas on Euclid. This is a craft fair extravaganza is held the first Saturday in December. High end artist/merchants come to sell their creations. The Ontario Rotary also participates in this event by having a classic car show that raises money for the library. Euclid Avenue is closed to traffic from G street to Holt for area residents to enjoy shopping for Christmas present and having a delicious meal. In 2009 the Ontario Kiwanis took over management of the event.The All-States Picnic, an Independence Day celebration, began in 1939 to recognize the varied origins of the citys residents. Picnic tables lined the median of Euclid Avenue from Hawthorne to E Street, with signs for each of the countrys 48 states. The picnic was suspended during War II, but when it resumed in 1948, it attracted 120,000 people. A 1941 Believe It or Not! cartoon listed Ontarios picnic table as the worlds longest. As native Californians came to outnumber the out-of-state-born, the celebration waned in popularity until it was discontinued in 1981. It was revived in 1991 as a celebration of civic pride.(dailybulletin.com)For over 50 years the first Saturday in June the Ontario Kiwanis and the Ontario Rotary partner for the annual Pancake Breakfast and Car Show. Over 10,000 inland empire residents come to eat delicious pancakes and view the over 400 cars that come to show off their gorgeous paint jobs and hope appreciate all the hard work they put into the cars.GeographyOntario is located at 343 North, 11738 West (34.05, -117.63).According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of . Of that,  is land and  is water. The total area is 0.13% water.Surrounding municipalitiesClimatedateAugust 2010Demographics2010After a long period of growth, Ontario showed a population decline between the 2000 and 2010 censuses.The United States Census() reported that Ontario had a population of 163,924. The density was 3,278.1 people per square mile (1,265.7/km). The racial makeup of Ontario was 83,683 (51.0%) White, 10,561 (6.4%) African American, 1,686 (1.0%) Native American, 8,453 (5.2%) Asian, 514 (0.3%) Pacific Islander, 51,373 (31.3%) from other races, and 7,654 (4.7%) from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino of any race were 113,085 persons (69.0%). The Census reported that 163,166 people (99.5% of the population) lived in households, 411 (0.3%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 347 (0.2%) were institutionalized.  There were 44,931 households, out of which 23,076 (51.4%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 23,789 (52.9%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 7,916 (17.6%) had a female householder with no husband present, 3,890 (8.7%) had a male householder with no wife present.  There were 3,470 (7.7%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 384 (0.9%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 6,741 households (15.0%) were made up of individuals and 2,101 (4.7%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.63.  There were 35,595 families (79.2% of all households); the average family size was 3.98.The population was spread out with 49,443 people (30.2%) under the age of 18, 19,296 people (11.8%) aged 18 to 24, 49,428 people (30.2%) aged 25 to 44, 34,703 people (21.2%) aged 45 to 64, and 11,054 people (6.7%) who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 29.9 years. For every 100 females there were 99.0 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.8 males.There were 47,449 housing units at an average density of 948.9 per square mile (366.4/km), of which 24,832 (55.3%) were owner-occupied, and 20,099 (44.7%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 2.0%; the rental vacancy rate was 5.8%.  90,864 people (55.4% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 72,302 people (44.1%) lived in rental housing units.2000As of the census of 2000, there were 158,007 people, 43,525 households, and 34,689 families residing in the city. The density was 3,173.9 inhabitants per square mile (1,225.5/km). There were 45,182 housing units at an average density of 907.6 per square mile (350.4/km). The racial makeup of the city was 47.8% White, 7.5% African American, 1.1% Native American, 3.9% Asian, 0.4% Pacific Islander, 34.1% from other races and 5.3% were from two or more races. 59.9% were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 43,525 households out of which 49.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.9% were married couples living together, 15.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 20.3% were non-families. 15.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 4.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.6 and the average family size was 4.0.In the city the population was spread out with 34.4% under the age of 18, 11.2% from 18 to 24, 32.4% from 25 to 44, 16.1% from 45 to 64, and 5.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 28 years. For every 100 females there were 100.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.7 males.The median income for a household in the city was $42,452, and the median income for a family was $44,031. Males had a median income of $31,664 versus $26,069 for females. The capita income for the city was $14,244. 15.5% of the population and 12.2% of families were below the line. 19.1% of those under the age of 18 and 7.6% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.GovernmentLocal governmentThe city is governed by a five-member council: Mayor Paul Leon, who was elected as mayor in 2005, re-elected in November 2006 and is the first Hispanic to serve in that position in the history of Ontario, Mayor pro tem Debra Dorst-Porada, Alan Wapner, Jim Bowman and Sheila Mautz. Councilmembers Bowman and Wapner being the longest tenured members on the council both with 17 years in office. Councilmember Bowman being the only member of the council that is a lifelong resident of Ontario.(66 years)thumb|250px|right|The Ontario City Library following its 2006 reopening after extensive remodelingAccording to the citys most recent Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the citys various funds had $399.4 million in revenues, $305.3 million in expenditures, $1,606.0 million in total assets, $317.6 million in total liabilities, and $412.4 million in cash and investments.(City Ontario CAFR Retrieved 2009-08-14)The structure of the management and coordination of city services is:(City of Ontario CAFR Retrieved 2009-08-14)PoliticsIn the state legislature Ontario is located in the 32nd Senate District, represented by Democrat Negrete McLeod, and in the 61st Assembly District, represented by Democrat Torres. Federally, Ontario is located in 43rd congressional district, which has a Cook PVI of D +13() and is represented by Democrat Baca.thumb|right|National University, Ontario, California campusEducation       Ontario has 25 public elementary schools, six public middle schools and five public high schools under the combined oversight of four school districts. There are also several schools throughout the city as well as two private schools. Ontario also has nine schools. Christian College, a four-year Christian liberal arts college, opened in 2005. The of La Verne College of Law and College Ontario Campus are located in downtown Ontario. National University and University have a campus near the Ontario Mills mall.TransportationThe International Airport provides domestic and limited international air travel. Because of the many manufacturing companies and warehouses in the city, the airport also serves as a major hub for freight, especially for FedEx and UPS. This airport is owned by the city of Los Angeles.Because Ontario is a major hub for passengers and freight, the city is also served by several major freeways. Interstate 10 and the Freeway (State Route 60) run east-west through the city. Interstate 10 is north of the Ontario airport while the Pomona freeway is south of the airport. Interstate 15 runs in the north-south directions at the eastern side of the city. State Route 83, also known as Euclid Avenue, also runs in the north-south direction at the western side of the city.Ontario also has a Metrolink station off of Haven Avenue. It connects Ontario with much of the Greater Los Angeles area, Orange County and the San Fernando Valley. Public bus transportation is provided by Omnitrans.TourismThe Mills mall is home to the only Rogers Roasters still operating within the United States.Sister citiesOntario has four sister cities around the world.(http://www.ci.ontario.ca.us/index.cfm/21956/11049) They are:*  Ontario, Canada (since 1977)*  Guamuchil, Sinaloa, Mexico (since 1982)*  Mocorito, Sinaloa, Mexico (since 1982)*  Winterthur, Switzerland (since 1982)Notable residents*Alter, pioneer surfboard maker and catamaran builder*Barajas, MLB player for the Angeles Dodgers*Brulte, politician (chaffey.org)*Bumstead, Award-winning cinematic art director and designer*Cleary, Author and Medal award winning Novelist.(1984),The Luckiest Girl and memoir My Own Two Feet*Kooiman, former soccer player*Harry Chamberlin, inventor of the Chamberlin electro-mechanical keyboard(http://www.mellotron.com/history.htm)*Crandall, former MLB player*Donovan, MLS player for the Angeles Galaxy and formerly Everton of the League*Fielder, player for the Brewers*Patricia Gonzlez, winner of Belleza Latina 2010 (Our Latin Beauty 2010)*Graettinger, composer*Haskvitz, Teachers Hall of Fame inductee, educator and author(chaffey.org)*Leyva, former manager of the Phillies (19891991)(http://www.retrosheet.org//boxesetc/Pleyvn801.htm)*Christina T Lopez, singer, actress; former member of Latin girl dance-pop band Soluna(http://www.qvmagazine.com/qv29/soluna.html Soluna On FireThe Girls Of Soluna Like UsThey Really Do! - QV Magazine)*Muoz, 1998 Football Hall of Fame inductee*Newman, former MLB player (Al Newman Statistics - The Baseball Cube)*Northway, Olympic bronze medalist, swimming(http://www.sports-reference.com/olympics/athletes/no/doug-northway-1.html Doug Northway Biography and Statistics)*OBrien,  Actress, graduate of Union High School District.*Scarbury, singer(Joey Scarbury, born in Ontario, California, singer, Greatest American Hero June 7 in History)*Robert Shaw, conductor(Alumni Hall of Fame)*Sweeney, MLB player for the Phillies, attended Ontario High School and led their baseball team to an undefeated record in 1991 which led to the state CIF title(mikesweeney.org)*Wambaugh, author(chaffey.org)*Zappa, musician and composer*Pierce, American Football playerReferencesExternal links *Chamber of Commerce*Official City Website*Convention & Visitors Bureau**The Frankish Building: A Reflection of the Success of Ontario, California, a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson planlist1()(Califrnia)(Kalifornie)(Kalifornien)(California)(California)(Californie)Kalifornija(California)CaliforniaCaliforniaKalifni(Californi)()pnb:(Kalifornia)(Califrnia)California(Kalifornia)KalifornienCalifornia()California(California)California()
108298
Lindsay,_California
footnotes                Lindsay is a city in Tulare County, California, States. The population was 11,768 at the 2010 census. Lindsay is located southeast of Visalia and is considered part of the Metropolitan Area by the States Census Bureau.HistoryThe Yandanche  tribe of Native Americans came to hunt and fish at the future site of Lindsay for centuries.(http://www.lindsay.ca.us/aacity/history.cfm) Future Governor of California  C. Fremont passed through twice by way of the - Los Angeles Road and the later Overland Mail route on two of his four exploration trips.  Julius Orton, a seventh generation descendant of Thomas, served as security for a pack train headed for Placerville, a booming California gold mining town, motivated by his futile search for gold.  In 1859, with his wife and two small daughters, and driving a small herd of cattle,  walked more than  from the coast near Sacramento, to a homestead along the River,  southwest of Lindsay.  In the 1880s,  Julius Orton homesteaded  another () piece of land bordering on the property of pioneers Lewis and Keeley, brothers who had taken on a homestead just a few miles southwest of Lindsay in the mid 1870s.(In 1889, the founder of the City of Lindsay, Captain Hutchinson, moved to California because of his ill health. He moved to the Lindsay area and bought  to found the Lindsay Land Company.  When the Pacific Railroad came through the area in 1889, development of the Lindsay townsite was begun.  Hutchinson laid out the plan for the township, and named the community for his wife, Sadie Lindsay Patton Hutchinson.(PoliticsIn the state legislature Lindsay is located in the 16th Senate District, represented by Democrat Florez, and in the 34th Assembly District, represented by Republican Conway. Federally, Lindsay is located in 21st congressional district, which has a Cook PVI of R +13() and is represented by Republican Nunes. Its mayor pro tempore is Esteban (Steve) Velasquez.City Manager salary controversyLindsays resident have been in an uproar since they learned their City Manager Scot Townsend was being paid $214,405 annually reported the Angeles Times.  Echoing the scandal in Bell, California, Townsend was actually earning more per capita than Bells former city manager. There are only 11,768 residents in Lindsay, compared to Bells population of 37,000.:We had a great run. I got paid 10 percent to 20 percent more than my counterparts, Townsend said. And the citizens, its their community and they have a right to ask how much you get paid. Townsend has since resigned, because of death threats.(http://www.upi.com/Top_News/US/2011/02/21/Bell-Calif-pay-scandal-causes-ripples/UPI-99371298310794/)GeographyLindsay is located at  (36.207172, -119.088810).According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 2.6 square miles (6.8 km), all of it land.Demographics2010The United States Census() reported that Lindsay had a population of 11,768. The density was 4,509.4 people per square mile (1,741.1/km). The racial makeup of Lindsay was 6,480 (55.1%) White, 85 (0.7%) African American, 128 (1.1%) Native American, 267 (2.3%) Asian, 4 (0.0%) Pacific Islander, 4,367 (37.1%) from other races, and 437 (3.7%) from two or more races.  Hispanic or Latino of any race were 10,056 persons (85.5%). The Census reported that 11,672 people (99.2% of the population) lived in households, 0 (0%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 96 (0.8%) were institutionalized.  There were 3,014 households, out of which 1,890 (62.7%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 1,719 (57.0%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 578 (19.2%) had a female householder with no husband present, 233 (7.7%) had a male householder with no wife present.  There were 242 (8.0%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 19 (0.6%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 401 households (13.3%) were made up of individuals and 210 (7.0%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.87.  There were 2,530 families (83.9% of all households); the average family size was 4.21.The population was spread out with 4,523 people (38.4%) under the age of 18, 1,439 people (12.2%) aged 18 to 24, 3,079 people (26.2%) aged 25 to 44, 1,848 people (15.7%) aged 45 to 64, and 879 people (7.5%) who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 24.6 years. For every 100 females there were 101.3 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.8 males.There were 3,193 housing units at an average density of 1,223.5 per square mile (472.4/km), of which 1,526 (50.6%) were owner-occupied, and 1,488 (49.4%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 2.0%; the rental vacancy rate was 6.2%.  5,909 people (50.2% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 5,763 people (49.0%) lived in rental housing units.2000As of the census of 2000, there were 10,297 people, 2,717 households, and 2,208 families residing in the city.  The density was 1,649.7/km (4,264.4/mi).  There were 2,865 housing units at an average density of 459.0/km (1,186.5/mi).  The racial makeup of the city was 44.83% White, 0.57% African American, 1.51% Native American, 1.06% Asian, 0.15% Pacific Islander, 48.27% from other races, and 3.62% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 77.97% of the population.There were 2,717 households out of which 53.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.2% were married couples living together, 17.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 18.7% were non-families. 15.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 3.74 and the average family size was 4.16.In the city the population was spread out with 38.0% under the age of 18, 11.4% from 18 to 24, 27.3% from 25 to 44, 14.2% from 45 to 64, and 9.1% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 25 years. For every 100 females there were 102.6 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.0 males.The median income for a household in the city was $24,305, and the median income for a family was $24,934. Males had a median income of $23,645 versus $18,992 for females. The capita income for the city was $8,230.  About 33.3% of families and 39.9% of the population were below the line, including 49.3% of those under age 18 and 12.3% of those age 65 or over. Attractions *Field House*Best City in the worldReferencesExternal links*Lindsay official website (, )(Califrnia)(Kalifornien)(California)Kalifni(Californi)()(Califrnia)Californiafi:LindsayCalifornia(California)
108406
Louisville,_Colorado
footnotes                Louisville () is a Home Rule Municipality in Boulder County, Colorado, States.  The population was 18,937 at the 2000 census.  Louisville began as a rough mining community in 1877, suffered through a period of extraordinary labor violence early in the 20th century, and then, when the mines closed in the 1950s, made a transition to suburban residential community. Note that, unlike the city with a similar name in Kentucky, this citys name is pronounced Lewis-ville and not Louie-ville.Early historyThe town of Louisville dates back to the start of the Welch Mine in 1877, the first coal mine in an area of Boulder and Weld counties known as the Northern Coalfield. The town was named for Louis Nawatny, a local landowner who platted his land and named it for himself. Incorporation came several years later, in 1882.(Conarroe, Carol, The Louisville Story. Louisville, CO: Conarroe, 1978.)The Northern Coalfield proved to be highly productive, and eventually some 30 different mines operated within the current boundaries of Louisville, though not all at the same time. During the years of peak production (190709) twelve mines were in operation in Louisville, including the Acme Mine whose two million tons of coal came from directly beneath the center of town. The presence of many independent mining companies in Louisville saved the town from becoming a company town, wholly owned and dominated by a single mining company.(Coal from the Northern Coalfield was sub-bituminous (low grade) and could not be transported long distances because of problems with self-combustion. Mining generally took place in winter months since that was the period that demanded fuel for heating. During the summers the miners played in local baseball leagues, with the home field named Miners Field.A great deal of mythology has arisen around the stories of tunnels that connected saloons throughout the city, but these have proven to be unfounded and undocumented. Instead, during labor conflicts many citizens found refuge in dirt basements to avoid errant bullets being fired from mine compounds into the city. From 191014 the Northern Colorado Coalfields were in the midst of a strike by the Mine Workers of America and the Mountain Fuel Company based on working conditions, pay, and working hours.  When miners walked out on the Hecla Mine (northeast) of Louisville the company hired the Baldwin Felts Detective Agency to guard the mine compound.  A machine gun and spotlight were placed in a tower on the Hecla property and, when miners took out their frustration by shooting their guns at the compound, the detectives responded by returning their fire by randomly firing at the town.(Eventually the coal remaining in the Northern Coalfield became increasingly uneconomical to mine, and the last coal mines operating in Louisville closed in the 1950s. Recent events In recent years, Louisville has been recognized in four publications as one of the best places to live and raise a family in the United States*In July 2005, CNN/Money and Money magazine ranked Louisville fifth on their list of the 100 best places to live in the United States. Criteria included financial, housing, education, quality of life, leisure and culture, and weather data.(Best Places to Live, by Kate Ashford et al., Money magazine, July 2005.)*In May 2006, Bert Sperling & Peter Sander, authors of the book Best Places to Raise Your Family: The Top 100 Affordable Communities in the U.S., ranked Louisville first on their list of best places in the U.S. to raise a family.()()*In August 2007, CNN/Money and Money magazine again ranked Louisville third on their list of the 100 best places to live in the United States.(Best Places to Live, by Kate Ashford et al., Money magazine, August 2007, pp. 84-94.)*In July 2009, CNN/Money and Money magazine named Louisville the Winner and ranked first on their list of 100 best places to live in the United States.(Best Places to Live Money magazine, July 2009)*In July 2011, CNN/Money and Money magazine again named Louisville the Winner and ranked first on their list of 100 best places to live in the United States, the second time it has graced the top slot of the magazines annual listing.(Best Places to Live 2011 Money magazine, July 2011)As of 2007, the City of Louisville offers its residents a Recreation/Senior Center, 26 city parks, extensive open space buffer zones,  of trails and bicycle paths, and a new $9 million public library with study rooms, teen areas, and a fireside reading room. The Louisville Public Library has long had one of the highest circulation rates in the State of Colorado.( ) Demographics As of the census of 2000, there were 18,937 people, 7,216 households, and 4,950 families residing in the city. As of the census of 2010 there were 18,376 people. () The density was 2,223.6 people per square mile (858.2/km). There were 7,389 housing units at an average density of 867.6 per square mile (334.8/km). The racial makeup of the city was 91.17% White, 0.93% African American, 0.54% Native American, 3.55% Asian, 0.08% Pacific Islander, 1.83% from other races, and 1.90% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.02% of the population.There were 7,216 households out of which 40.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.3% were married couples living together, 8.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.4% were non-families. 22.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 4.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.13.In the city the population was spread out with 28.7% under the age of 18, 6.3% from 18 to 24, 35.6% from 25 to 44, 23.3% from 45 to 64, and 6.1% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 36 years.  For every 100 females there were 98.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.0 males.The median income for a household in the city was $69,945, and the median income for a family was $81,512.  Males had a median income of $57,159 versus $36,659 for females.  The capita income for the city was $31,828. 3.0% of the population and 2.1% of families were below the line. 2.2% of those under the age of 18 and 5.6% of those 65 and older were living below the line.EducationThere are six public schools, six private schools, and two libraries in Louisville http://mywikicity.com/wiki/index.php?titleLouisville. The public secondary schools are Monarch High School, Monarch K-8 and Louisville Middle School.GeographyLouisville is located at  (39.976035, 105.144067).According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 8.6 square miles (22.2 km). 8.5 square miles (22.1 km) of it is land and 0.04 square miles (0.1 km) of it (0.47%) is water.ClimatedateAugust 2010Community Attractions and Lifestyle Louisvilles historical downtown includes Steinbaugh Pavilion(), which is used for a concert venue during summer street fairs and an ice rink in the winter months. See also * County, Colorado* Metropolitan Statistical Area* municipalities* Combined Statistical Area* Range Urban Corridor* Parkway* of Colorado References External links* City of Louisville website** City of Louisville, Colorado - Business Development & Commercial Real Estate (official website)**CDOT map of the City of Louisville* Louisville Chamber of Commerce (official website)* Colorado Hometown Weekly (Louisville Weekly Newspaper)()(Colorado)(Colorado)(Colorado)(Colorado)Kolorado(Colorado)(Kolorado)(Colorado)Colorado(Colorado)
108442
Dove_Creek,_Colorado
footnotes                 The Town of Dove Creek is a Statutory Town that is the seat and the most populous town of Dolores County, Colorado, States. Dove Creek is the self-proclaimed Pinto Bean Capital of the World. The estimated population in 2009, according to the Community Survey was 689(.GeographyDove Creek is located at  (37.765994, -108.905691).According to the States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all of it land.The town is located on 491 (formerly 666) at the crossing of Dove Creek, the towns namesake.  Dove Creek flows south to Cross Canyon, Creek, Utah, and the San Juan River. The town is located on the northern portion of the Great Sage Plain, a large plateau covered in desert lands, bounded by the Plata Mountains, Verde National Park, the Sal Mountains, and the Mountains, and cut by dozens of deep canyons, which was and is a productive agricultural region.  The plateau is dotted with numerous ruins of the Anasazi and other ancient people who took advantage of good soils and terrain, even with limited water resources.The Dolores County Courthouse, built in 1957, replaces a temporary courthouse in the town used after voters of the county moved the county seat from Colorado to Dove Creek in 1947, reflecting a shift in the original mining-oriented make-up of the countys population to the current situation in which farmers and a few ranchers outnumber the mountain-dwellers in the old mining districts of the eastern end of Dolores County.  The courthouse is adjacent to Dolores County High School, and is part of the old business district located north of US 491; most business is now located on US 491 as it angles through the town from ESE to WNW. A regional landmark is the large concrete bean elevator located on the west edge of town, near the Dolores County Industrial Park.CO-141 intersects with US 491 just west of town, and provides access to the Paradox Valley, Nucla-Naturita, and the uranium mining and industrial area of Montrose County, Colorado, and Grand County, Utah.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 698 people, 285 households, and 202 families residing in the town. The density was 1,322.5 people per square mile (508.5/km). There were 326 housing units at an average density of 617.7 per square mile (237.5/km). The racial makeup of the town was 96.28% White, 1.86% Native American, 0.29% from other races, and 1.58% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.87% of the population.There were 285 households out of which 31.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.4% were married couples living together, 13.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.8% were non-families. 26.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 14.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 2.93.In the town the population was spread out with 26.6% under the age of 18, 7.9% from 18 to 24, 24.4% from 25 to 44, 22.3% from 45 to 64, and 18.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 97.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.0 males.The median income for a household in the town was $27,500, and the median income for a family was $32,813. Males had a median income of $28,333 versus $17,500 for females. The capita income for the town was $13,015. About 8.9% of families and 12.3% of the population were below the line, including 9.9% of those under age 18 and 16.0% of those age 65 or over.The development of the Dolores County Industrial Park west of Dove Creek, the site of a biodiesel plant which began construction in 2007, currently produces food-grade vegetable oil from sunflowers, safflower, and canola grown in the Dove Creek area, and will ultimately produce biodiesel, is an attempt to add value and stabilize markets for produce grown locally.  The industrial park is also home to the communitys first ready-mix plant in many decades, and other businesses.  New housing developments have been permitted and platted in the Dove Creek area, anticipating growth due to efforts like this.  On the eastern edge of the town is the headquarters and facility of Adobe Milling, a company marketing various locally-grown beans and other traditional southwestern foods.Major employers in the town include the county government and school district, and various other government agencies.  Most businesses in town support agricultural operations; some provide transportation services for highway users.See also*municipalities*County, Colorado*Spanish National Historic Trail*of ColoradoReferencesExternal links*Town of Dove Creek contacts**CDOT map of the Town of Dove Creek**San Juan Bioenergy website**Adobe Milling websiteCreekCreek (Colorado)Creek (Colorado)CreekCreek, KoloradoCreekCreekCreek
108523
Walsenburg,_Colorado
footnotes                 The City of Walsenburg or Los Leones is a Statutory City that is the seat and the most populous city of Huerfano County, Colorado, States.(  The city population was 4,182 at the 2000 census.Robert Ford, the assassin of outlaw James, operated a combination saloon and gambling house in Walsenburg; his home at 320 West 7th Street still stands.HistoryThe City of Walsenburg traces its history back about 150 years. The settlement was first established as La Plaza de los Leones which was named after the Leon family on the north side of the Cuchara River by Don Miguel Antonio Leon and a family named Atencio. In 1870, Fred Walsen settled nearby and opened up his large mercantile, making the town an attractive location for German settlers. After Fred assisted in the incorporation of the towns  site, it was suggested that he be honored by formally naming the new town Walsenburg. In 1876, Walsen also opened the areas first coal mine, and the development of the town was influenced for a century by coal mining in the region. An estimated 500 million tons of coal was mined until a combination of corporate mergers, environmental regulations, and enforcement of mine safety regulations led to the closure of virtually all mining in the area.GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau, Walsenburg has a total area of , all of it land.The Spanish Peaks Regional Health Center is located two miles (3 km) west of Walsenburg on , opposite the entrance to Lathrop State Park. Inside the building, there are a state-operated veterans retirement home and a community hospital that serves the area.  Walsenburg has transformed itself in recent years with the revitalization of its downtown area, led by the efforts of Richard McEntee and Marti Henderson and many other local businesses who have joined together to revitalize this historic and scenic community.Local attractions and recreationState Park, located  west of the city limits of Walsenburg, is the State of Colorados first State Park and is over  in size.  Two lakes, Martin Lake and Horseshoe Lake offer fishing, stocked by the State of Colorado (Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources), water skiing, boating, jet skiing, hiking, camping and is the only State Park in Colorado with a golf course. The nearby Peaks are a national landmark and named one of Seven Wonders by Denver Post.  The Highway of The Legends, connecting Walsenburg with La Veta, other historic mining towns, and Trinidad, is a Scenic and Historic Byway,  The Walsenburg Golf Course is a 9 hole public golf course open for play year round.  The City opened a two-million dollar water park, Walsenburg Wild Waters after efforts by former mayor Maurice Brau and the City Council, on May 27, 2007.Recent eventsOn July 20, 2007 the City of Walsenburg proclaimed the day: Don Ho/Waikiki BeachBoy Day and welcomed 13 Hawaiians who traveled to Walsenburg from Hawaii as the guests of local citizen/developer Richard McEntee.  The Don Ho/Waikiki Day proclamation was personally delivered to Honolulu Mayor Mufi Hannemann in the Mayors office in Honolulu, by Richard McEntee on July 11, 2007.The BeachBoys led by Frank Manuma, Harry Makalena, Lionel Haile, George Aio, Sam Honokano, Bruce Sharsh, Peter Kama and others performed a concert at the new water park Walsenburg Wild Waters raising over $20,000.00 for the youth of Walsenburg.  The State Flags of Colorado and Hawaii were exchanged and flown over the state capitols in Honolulu and Denver. Sponsored by Colorado Senator Ken Kester and Hawaii Hawaii Rep. Gene Ward.  Hawaii Rep. Barbara Murumoto issued Spirit of Aloha proclamations to The City of Walsenburg, Colo. Sen. Kester and Richard McEntee that were signed by Hawaii Rep. Barbara Murumoto and Hawaii Speaker of the House Calvin Lay.  Hawaii Gov. Linda Lingle also signed a proclamation validating the Hawaii State flag.  It was a great cultural exchange between Walsenburg and Hawaii that will be treasured for many years to come.  Plans call for another Hawaiian Don Ho/Waikiki Beachboy Day in 2009.The areas first new subdivision in 25 years, Black Diamond Park, is attracting investors and future residents with its features which include an impressive gated entrance. Black Diamond Park is a master planned gated community that borders the Walsenburg Golf Course and Lathrop State Park.  The subdivision features all-underground utilities and ready-to-build estate home sites with spectacular views of the Peaks, the De Cristo Mountains, Mt. Mestas, Mountain, and the Walsen Ridge.Over 3.6 million cars a year pass through this Gateway to the Southwest and travel and tourism are important to the local community.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 4,182 people, 1,497 households, and 881 families residing in the city.  The density was 1,795.2 people per square mile (693.0/km).  There were 1,723 housing units at an average density of 739.6 per square mile (285.5/km).  The racial makeup of the city was 74.99% White, 4.78% African American, 3.35% Native American, 0.41% Asian, 0.07% Pacific Islander, 12.46% from other races, and 3.95% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 50.96% of the population.There were 1,497 households out of which 25.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.1% were married couples living together, 13.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41.1% were non-families. 37.3% of all households were made up of individuals and 19.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.95.In the city the population was spread out with 20.9% under the age of 18, 9.3% from 18 to 24, 31.1% from 25 to 44, 21.2% from 45 to 64, and 17.5% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 133.1 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 141.1 males.See also*of Colorado**cities and towns***municipalities**counties***County, ColoradoReferencesExternal links*City of Walsenburg website*Walsenburg on Sangres.com*CDOT map of the City of Walsenburgbg:ca:Walsenburges:Walsenburgfr:Walsenburgit:WalsenburgKoloradonl:Walsenburgpt:Walsenburgfi:Walsenburgvo:Walsenburg
108611
Ridgway,_Colorado
named_for                 Robert M. RidgwayThe Town of Ridgway, coined Gateway to the San Juans, is a Home Rule Municipality in Ouray County, in the southwestern portion of the U.S. of Colorado. The town is a former railroad stop on the Uncompaghre River in the northern Juan Mountains. The town population was 713 at the 2000 census and 924 according to the 2010 census.(Colorado Trend Report 2: State and Complete Places (Sub-state 2010 Census Data). Missouri Census Data Center. Accessed 2011-02-25.)Steep forested mountains and cliffs surround Ridgway on the south, east, and northeast. The River runs through the town and flows into the State Park and Reservoir, to the north. Dallas Creek also flows from the south west and forms a confluence with the Uncompahgre before entering the reservoir. There is a notable wildlife presence &mdash; mountain lions, badgers, deer, elk, bears, coyotes, wild turkey, and eagles are indigenous to the area. The regions bald eagles nest in the cottonwoods along the river and are a common sight in the late fall.Ridgway and the surrounding area have featured predominantly in culture. Most notably the area is the setting of Waynes movie True Grit, and others including How the West Was Won and to a Bad Man. Ridgway has the only stop light in Ouray County, at the intersection of Highways 550 and 62.(Source Ridgway Estate)Historythumb|left|Path along the Uncompaghre river that leads from the town to the reservoirRidgway began as a railroad town, serving the nearby mining towns of Telluride and Ouray.The town site is at the northern terminus of the Grande Southern Railroad where it meets with and Rio Grande Western Railroad running between Montrose and Ouray.  Ridgway was located about  south of the existing town of Dallas.  Articles of incorporation were filed on May 22, 1890 and granted on March 4, 1891. This Gateway to the San Juans position was recognized over 100 years ago when the Rio Grande Southern established Ridgway as a railhead center servicing the nearby mining towns of Ouray and Telluride. The town was named for Denver and Rio Grande railroad superintendent Robert M. Ridgway, who established the town in 1891.The Rio Grande Southern filed for abandonment on April 24, 1952 and the Denver and Rio Grande Western abandoned the line between Ridgway and Ouray on March 21, 1953. The line between Ridgway and Montrose was upgraded from narrow gauge to gauge and Ridgway continued to be a shipping point until the line to Montrose was abandoned in 1976 as result of a reservoir being built on the Uncompahgre River.The dam for that reservoir, the Dam, was proposed in 1957 as part of the U.S. of Reclamations Dallas Creek Project, and its original location would have inundated Ridgway. A 1975 decision to put the dam further downstream kept the town above-water, and residents coined their own nickname, The Town that Refused to Die.(Gregory, Doris H.: The Town that Refused to Die: Ridgway, Colorado 1890-1991, Cascade Publications, 1991) Land around the reservoir became the State Park north of town limits.GeographyRidgway is situated in the Valley at an elevation of 6985 feet. The town is located on the San Juan Skyway, cradled in the heart of some of the most photographed mountains in the world. The nearby San Juan Mountain Range has 14 of Colorados 53 peaks over 14,000 feet.(14ers.com - Home of Colorados Fourteeners and High Peaks)  Among them, 14,150 foot (4,310 m) Mt. Sneffels is most prominent from Ridgway. The eponymous Mt. Ridgway,  in height, is also nearby,  west of Ouray.(Climb.mountains.com - Mount Ridgway) To the east of the town also lies the smaller but equally as grand, the Cimarron Range with Uncompahgre Peak at .The Uncompahgre River flows from Lake Como at 12,215 ft (3723 m) in northern San Juan County, in the Uncompahgre National Forest in the northwestern San Juan Mountains is the headwaters of the river. It flows northwest past Ouray, Ridgway, Montrose, and Olathe and joins the Gunnison at Confluence Park in Delta. The river forms Poughkeepsie Gulch and the Uncompahgre Gorge. The major tributaries are all creeks draining the northwest San Juan Mountains. There are two dams on the Uncompahgre River, a small diversion dam in the Uncompahgre Gorge, and Ridgway Dam below the town of Ridgway, which forms Ridgway Reservoir.The river is used for irrigation in the Uncompahgre Valley. The Uncompahgre is unnavigable, except at high water. The name given to the river comes from the Ute word Uncompaghre, which loosely translates to dirty water or red water spring and is likely a reference to the many hot springs in the vicinity of Ouray. Lake Otonawanda is the primary source of Ridgways municipal water.(http://www.town.ridgway.co.us/Annua_%20water_report_2007_REVISED.pdf Annua_%20water_report_2007_REVISED.pdf)dateJuly 2011Demographicsthumb|right|Morning near Ridgway after heavy snowfallAs of the census of 2010,() there were 924 people, 404 households, and 256 families residing in the town. The density was 462 people per square mile (177.7/km2). There were 511 housing units at an average density of 255.5 per square mile (98.3/km2). The racial makeup of the town was 95.5% White, 0.1% (1) African American,  0.6% (6) Native American, 0.8% (7) Asian, 0.8% (7) from other races, and 1.8% (17) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.0% of the population.There were 404 households out of which 31.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.2% were married couples living together, 7.7% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.5% had a male householder with no wife present, and 36.6% were non-families. 28.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 4.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.29 and the average family size was 2.82.In the town the population was spread out with 23.3% under the age of 18, 28.6% from 18 to 44, 37.1% from 45 to 64, and 11.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43.7 years. For every 100 females there were 94.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.7 males.The median income for a household in the town was $40,903, and the median income for a family was $45,208. Males had a median income of $31,597 versus $26,250 for females. The capita income for the town was $20,084. About 3.2% of families and 4.3% of the population were below the line, including 6.9% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.Tourism and cultureRidgway is poised on a highway that leads tourists to several other mountain towns of the San Juan region. Ridgway itself is a major tourist town of Colorado. Ridgway is 37 miles east of the ski town of Telluride and 10 miles north of the tourist town of Ouray. The area is also set at the base of the Juan Mountains providing excellent views especially when viewed from Hill Mesa.The Grammy AwardsThe Award trophy is manufactured exclusively by Billings Artworks in Ridgway.http://www.billingsartworks.com/grammy_making.php The trophies are all hand made, assembled, and plated on site.WaterWater plays an important part of local Ridgway culture. The town maintains a marina in a northern inlet of the Reservoir. During the warm summer months many tourist and locals take advantage of the Ridgway Reservoir, often wakeboarding or enjoying a day at its beach.The town also features Orvis Hot Springs, is a clothing optional natural hot springs resort near Ridgway with an indoor, clothing required, pool.Notable residentsAmong Ridgways population there are an assortment of recognizable and famous people.* Charles W. Charlie Ergen (born May 1, 1953) is the co-founder and CEO of Communications Corporation, the parent company of Network.(Source Floyd & Rob)* Lauren (born Ralph Lifschitz on October 14, 1939) is an American fashion designer and business executive.((Source Cityfile: Ralph Lauren)* Weaver (June 4, 1924 &ndash; February 24, 2006) was an Award-winning American actor, best known for his work in television, including roles as sidekick Chester Goode from 1955 to 1964 on TVs first adult Western Gunsmoke, as Marshal Sam McCloud on the NBC police drama McCloud, which ran from 1970 to 1977, and as the protagonist in Spielbergs feature-length directorial debut, the cult TV movie Duel in 1971.(SourceIMDb)(Source Ridgway Colorado)* H. Friedkin &ndash; Toyota king of Texas, Hollywood stunt flyer, African-game hunter &ndash; who fiercely guarded his privacy for 30 years.(Source Forbes)* Danny Thompson, American race car driver and businessman, son of the legendary Micky Thompson; known widely in the world of racing for setting multiple world records for speed at the Bonneville Salt Flats. Danny owns a fabrication company and race shop Western, Colorado, and will soon be opening up a second branch in Huntington Beach, California. He resides on Log Hill Mesa with his wife.* Jo Fultz, American painter and educator.* Hessler (b. June 14, 1969) &ndash; Writer and journalist; notable for his writings at New Yorker and contributions to Geographic (magazine), as well as three books.* Plumer Olympic distance runner and American record holder, went to junior high school and high school in Ridgway.()TransportationThe closest airport served by scheduled airlines is Regional Airport, located 28 miles north.Major highways*25px U.S. Highway 550 begins 27 miles north of Ridgway, in Montrose. It runs to New Mexico, near New Mexico via Colorado.*25px State Highway 62 is a 23.4 miles long highway, connecting Ridgway to State Highway 145, near Placerville.See also*of Ouray County*municipalities*Juan Skyway National Scenic BywayReferencesExternal links*Town of Ridgway website**CDOT map of the Town of Ridgway*Ridgway Chamber of Commerce*Ridgway Sun Newspaper(Colorado)(Colorado)(Colorado)Kolorado(Colorado)(Colorado)(Colorado)
108682
Nunn,_Colorado
footnotes                 Nunn is a Statutory Town in Weld County, Colorado, States. The population was 471 at the 2000 census. The town is small rural agricultural community located on the Eastern Plains north of Greeley. Somewhat isolated, it is surrounded by flat cultivated countryside of the Piedmont in area historically known for raising cattle, sheep, beets, beans and potatoes. The town was founded as a shipping point on the Pacific Railroad in the late 19th century and today sits along the western side of Highway 85 between Greeley and Wyoming. It consists of a small grid of single-family homes on gravel streets. The town has suffered a decline in both its economy and population beginning in the middle 20th century, and today the former storefronts along Logan Street parallel to the highway are largely boarded up. The remaining industry in town consists of a elevator and a cafe, as well as several industrial farm facilities on the outskirts of town. A major landmark is a large water tower emblazoned with the words watch Nunn grow. The remaining economic activity has largely shifted southward to the towns of Pierce and Ault. The town also has a town park and a municipal hall.GeographyNunn is located at .According to the States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all of it land.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 471 people, 158 households, and 118 families residing in the town.  The density was 266.7 people per square mile (102.7/km).  There were 174 housing units at an average density of 98.5 per square mile (38.0/km).  The racial makeup of the town was 78.98% White, 0.42% African American, 1.91% Native American, 0.21% Asian, 14.86% from other races, and 3.61% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 24.84% of the population.There were 158 households out of which 38.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.7% were married couples living together, 7.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.7% were non-families. 22.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.98 and the average family size was 3.50.In the town the population was spread out with 33.5% under the age of 18, 7.4% from 18 to 24, 31.0% from 25 to 44, 16.3% from 45 to 64, and 11.7% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females there were 101.3 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.9 males.The median income for a household in the town was $35,714, and the median income for a family was $40,357. Males had a median income of $27,292 versus $21,875 for females. The capita income for the town was $14,769.  About 17.2% of families and 19.0% of the population were below the line, including 24.8% of those under age 18 and 9.4% of those age 65 or over.Uranium-mining controversySee Centennial projectIn October 2006, Vancouver-based (USA) Inc. announced preliminary plans to mine uranium by leaching and possibly mining from a deposit in sandstones of the Hills Formation several miles west of Nunn. Some local residents have formed Coloradoans Against Resource Destruction (C.A.R.D.) to oppose the proposed mining.  They and a landowners organization called Stewards of the Land point out that the proposed mining area is only six miles northeast of the Fort Collins city limit, and that the Hills Formation is a major water-supply aquifer.  C.A.R.D. and SOTL dispute the safety of both leaching and mining for uranium.On July 19, 2007, Powertech held an informational meeting at the Nunn Community Center.See also275px|left|thumb|Municipal Hall in Nunn, Colorado.* municipalities* Combined Statistical Area* Range Urban Corridor* Metropolitan Statistical Area* leaching* mining* of Colorado* mining* mining in Colorado* County, ColoradoReferencesExternal links* Town of Nunn contacts* CDOT map of the Town of Nunn* Powertech (USA) Inc.* Coloradoans Against Resource Destruction / NunnGlow website* Powertech Exposedca:Nunn(Colorado)it:NunnKoloradonl:Nunn(Colorado)vo:Nunn
109106
Floral_City,_Florida
footnotes                 Floral City is a place (CDP) in Citrus County, Florida, States.  The population was 4,989 at the 2000 census.GeographyFloral City is located at 2844N 8218W (28.7407,-82.2954).According to the States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (6.38%) is water.Located at the 23 mile marker (middle) of the State Trail a linear state park. A rails to trials park and currently the longest paved trail in Florida 46 miles long.HistoryThe city was laid out and surveyed in 1883 by the surveyor W.H. Havron and then-Senator Austin S. Mann. The land was owned by James Baker, son-in-law of ex-confederate soldier John Paul Formy-Duval, an early area settler and landowner.  The village was at one time larger than Miami, due to the phosphate mining industry located in Citrus County.  Around the time of War I, the mining industry shut down in Floral City. After the war, mining was moved south to the Florida area east of Tampa.  Bordered on the east by the Withlacoochee River and in the middle of the State Forest, Floral City is 7 miles south of Florida on 41 and CR 48(formerly SR 48) and 13 miles north of Florida.This city is said to be a slice of Old Florida that remains relatively intact. The town was named Floral City for its abundance of wild flowers, which are still plentiful today. Floral City also marks the beginning of the Tsala Apopka chain of lakes, which run north into the Gulf of Mexico for the next 50 miles along the Withlacoochee River.(Withlacoochee State Trail (Official Website))DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 4,989 people, 2,180 households, and 1,473 families residing in the CDP.  The density was 213.9 people per square mile (82.6/km).  There were 2,664 housing units at an average density of 114.2/sq mi (44.1/km).  The racial makeup of the CDP was 96% White, 1.6% African American, 0.36% Native American, 0.14% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.38% from other races, and 1.14% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.6% of the population.There were 2,180 households out of which 20.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.7% were married couples living together, 7.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.4% were non-families. 27.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 16.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.69.In the CDP the population was spread out with 20.3% under the age of 18, 4.5% from 18 to 24, 20.5% from 25 to 44, 25.4% from 45 to 64, and 29.2% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 49 years. For every 100 females there were 92.3 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.6 males.The median income for a household in the CDP was $28,180, and the median income for a family was $33,404. Males had a median income of $26,972 versus $22,348 for females. The capita income for the CDP was $14,793.  About 10.7% of families and 15.1% of the population were below the line, including 22.6% of those under age 18 and 7.5% of those age 65 or over.ReferencesExternal links* http://www.city-data.com/picfilesv/picv13773.phpCityCityCityCityCity()City
109961
Nelson,_Georgia
footnotes                 Nelson is a city partly (.631 sq_mi) in Pickens and mostly (.792 sq_mi) in Cherokee counties in the state of Georgia.  As of the 2000 census, the city had a total population of 1314.City of Nelson - Pickens CountyPickens County was created in 1853 from parts of Cherokee and Gilmer counties. Georgias 100th county was named for General Andrew Pickens, a Revolutionary War soldier.According to the USGS GNIS, it is named for John Nelson, early landowner, farmer, and rifle maker.  It is served through its downtown by the Northeastern Railroad, and by the former route of state route 5 along its street.  South on old 5 is Ground, north is Tate.  The north end of 575 and south end of state route 515 is at the county line just to the southwest of Nelson.A railroad line built in 1883 from Atlanta, through the valleys and mountain passes of Pickens County to Tate and Nelson, made possible the development of large marble quarries. One of the largest marble veins in the world is in Pickens County, running at least four miles long. It is a half-mile deep and almost that wide in places. Over 60 percent of the monuments in Washington, D.C. are made from Pickens County marble.Marble Museum: Located in the Nelson City Hall 1985 Kennesaw Ave, Nelson, Georgia 30151 in Pickens County. It is open M-F 9 AM until 4 PM and may be reached at 770-735-2211. The museum includes a year-round exhibit that includes examples of fine marble and shows the history of marble mining in Pickens County. Many stone cutters and other workers who migrated from either Italy or Scotland in the early years of the industry settled in Nelson to work in the areas marble industry. Today the Great Northern Railroad operates between Tate, Georgia, and the CSX interchange at Elizabeth (Marietta) five days a week. The Georgia Marble rail lines at Tate and Marble Hill, and the Blue Ridge Scenic Railroad at Blue Ridge, Georgia are also operated by GNRR. Their web site also states the GNRR runs through a Georgia Marble facility that no is no longer served by rail at Nelson.GeographyNelson is located at  (34.381562, -84.371303).  According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all of it land.  Approximately 40% of the city is located in Pickens County and 60% in Cherokee County.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 626 people, 254 households, and 188 families residing in the city.  The density was 695.0 people per square mile (268.6/km).  There were 275 housing units at an average density of 305.3 per square mile (118.0/km).  The racial makeup of the city was 89.94% White, 9.42% African American, 0.16% Native American, 0.16% Asian, and 0.32% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.16% of the population.There were 254 households out of which 27.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 64.2% were married couples living together, 8.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.6% were non-families. 22.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 2.88.In the city the population was spread out with 19.3% under the age of 18, 7.7% from 18 to 24, 28.9% from 25 to 44, 27.2% from 45 to 64, and 16.9% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females there were 93.2 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.6 males.The median income for a household in the city was $44,250, and the median income for a family was $51,806. Males had a median income of $35,066 versus $30,450 for females. The capita income for the city was $20,604.  About 1.1% of families and 3.7% of the population were below the line, including 1.1% of those under age 18 and 8.5% of those age 65 or over.----Population in July 2008: 928.     Population change since 2000: +48.2%Males:   447 	 (48.2%)Females: 481 	 (51.8%)Median resident age: 	 42.0 yearsGeorgia median age: 	 33.4 yearsZip codes: 30151 and 30107Estimated median household income in 2008: $56,361 (it was $44,250 in 2000)Nelson: 	 $56,361Georgia: 	 $50,861Estimated per capita income in 2008: $26,140Estimated median house or condo value in 2008: $208,186 (it was $110,800 in 2000)Nelson: 	 $208,186Georgia: 	 $169,100Mean prices in 2008: All housing units: $204,682; Detached houses: $212,211; Townhouses or other attached units: $147,212; Mobile homes: $54,519; Occupied boats, RVs, vans, etc.: $27,500References((Gergia)(Georgia)GeorgiaGeorgie(Georgia)(Gergia)(Georgia)
110695
Emmett,_Idaho
 Emmett is a city in Gem County, Idaho, States. The population was 5,490 at the 2000 census; it was estimated to have risen to 6,341 by 2007.()  It is the seat and the only city in the county.  Emmett is part of the Boise City&ndash;Nampa, Idaho Metropolitan Statistical Area.HistoryRising some 5,906 feet, Squaw Butte, named by native Americans who used this area as their winter resort, stands at the north end of the valley. The Payette River was named after Francois Payette, who was put in charge of Fort Boise in 1818 and traveled through the area. Permanent settlement began in the early 1860s, after gold discoveries in the Boise Basin brought people over the established stage and pack train routes. Two of these trails joined at the Payette River north of the present river bridge in Emmett.Originally called Emmettville, it was primarily a post office named after Emmett Cahalan, the son of Tom Cahalan, an early settler of the area. The post office was later moved but retained the name. A few years later the ville was dropped and the post office and town became simply Emmett. In 1883 James Wardwell had the town platted, and in 1900 the town was incorporated as Emmett. Later, in March of 1902, the Idaho Northern railroad came to the valley. (http://www.gemcountymuseum.org/history-railroad.html, Gem County Historical Society, Accessed 2011-7-20)After the closing of the mines in 1906, the power lines were extended to Emmett. A series of irrigation projects made it possible for more rapid expansion of the town as the major service center for a farming and fruit-growing valley. In the early 1900s fruit packers adopted the label of Gem of Plenty because of the fertility of the valley. During the mining era the valley was known as the garden for the mining regions.(http://www.emmettid-realestate.com/history.htm, United Country Musick & Sons Auctions / Real Estate Accessed 2011-7-11)Until 2001, the city was home to a Cascade manufacturing facility.(Boise Cascade Announces Closure of Plywood, Lumber Operations in Idaho, Boise Cascade, 2001-02-13.  Accessed 2009-03-31.) The Black Canyon diversion dam on the River, built in the early 1920s, is east of the city.(USBR - Black Canyon Dam)GeographyEmmett is located at  (43.872834, -116.494902).According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all of it land.The city is located south of the River, at an elevation of 2362 feet (720 m) above sea level.Demographics11 memorial at Freezeout HillAs of the census of 2000, there were 5,490 people, 2,095 households, and 1,412 families residing in the city.  The density was 3,022.5 people per square mile (1,164.7/km).  There were 2,264 housing units at an average density of 1,246.4 per square mile (480.3/km).  The racial makeup of the city was 90.60% White, 0.07% African American, 0.75% Native American, 0.44% Asian, 0.15% Pacific Islander, 5.79% from other races, and 2.20% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 11.57% of the population.There were 2,095 households out of which 34.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.5% were married couples living together, 12.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.6% were non-families. 28.3% of all households were made up of individuals and 14.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 3.13.In the city the population was spread out with 28.4% under the age of 18, 9.1% from 18 to 24, 26.3% from 25 to 44, 18.4% from 45 to 64, and 17.8% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females there were 90.6 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.5 males.The median income for a household in the city was $26,480, and the median income for a family was $34,663. Males had a median income of $30,598 versus $19,088 for females. The capita income for the city was $13,027.  About 16.3% of families and 17.8% of the population were below the line, including 23.4% of those under age 18 and 16.5% of those age 65 or over.Population history*2007 estimate - 6,341()* 2000 - 5,940* 1990 - 4,601(Moffatt, Riley.  Population History of Western U.S. Cities & Towns, 1850-1990.  Lanham: Scarecrow, 1996, 92.)* 1980 - 4,605* 1970 - 3,945* 1960 - 3,769* 1950 - 3,067* 1940 - 3,203* 1930 - 2,763* 1920 - 2,204* 1910 - 1,351* 1900 - 508* 1890 - 197TransportationEmmett is served by State Highway 52, which connects it with Horseshoe Bend to the east and Payette to the west, and by State Highway 16, which connects it with Boise to the south.(Rand McNally.  The Road Atlas 09. Chicago: McNally, 2009, p. 31.)ClimateEmmett experiences a climate (Kppen BSk) with cold, moist winters and hot, dry summers.dateMarch 2011Notable peopleAward winner Paul was born in Emmett.()References(External links* Chamber of Commerce - Emmett and Gem Countybg:(Idaho)(Idaho)(Idaho)fr:EmmettIdahoIdaho(Idaho)(Idaho)IdahoIdaho(Idaho)
110902
Moweaqua,_Illinois
Moweaqua is a village in Shelby County, Illinois, States, and partly in County, Illinois. The population was 1,831 at the 2010 census.GeographyDecatur is located at .According to the States Census Bureau, the village has a total area of 1.1 square miles (2.9 km), all of it land.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 1,923 people, 772 households, and 541 families residing in the village.  The density was 1,720.0 people per square mile (662.9/km).  There were 819 housing units at an average density of 732.6 per square mile (282.3/km).  The racial makeup of the village was 99.17% White, 0.05% Native American, 0.26% Asian, 0.21% from other races, and 0.31% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.57% of the population.There were 772 households out of which 32.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.9% were married couples living together, 8.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.9% were non-families. 27.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 15.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 2.90.In the village the population was spread out with 23.9% under the age of 18, 7.5% from 18 to 24, 24.8% from 25 to 44, 21.7% from 45 to 64, and 22.2% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 82.6 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 80.1 males.The median income for a household in the village was $40,114, and the median income for a family was $48,750. Males had a median income of $38,750 versus $21,974 for females. The capita income for the village was $18,195.  About 7.3% of families and 11.9% of the population were below the line, including 18.3% of those under age 18 and 9.0% of those age 65 or over.EducationMoweaqua is served by the Central A&M School District, which was established in 1993, and also includes the city of Assumption as well as the nearby rural areas.  Central A&M High School (grades 9-12) and Gregory Intermediate School (3-5) are located in one building on the northern edge of Moweaqua.  The high school enrollment is approximately 300 students, and their teams are known as the Raiders. The Girls Varsity Basketball team went to the state competition in 2008 and won third place.HistoryFrom 1891 until 1935, Moweaqua was the site of a gassy mine that mined coal from Pennsylvanian strata.  On the morning of December 24, 1932, fifty-four coal miners, the entire day shift, were killed by a methane explosion in the Moweaqua coal mine disaster.  The incident occurred on the morning of Eve, and one of the deceased miners, Tom Jackson, had been scheduled to play Claus in a party to be held that evening for his fellow townspeople.  The tragic explosion, together with the election in the previous month (November 1932) of the pro-labor Seventy-Third Congress, led to the pasasge of mine safety legislation and the phaseout of open-flame carbide miners lanterns in United States coal mines.  The Moweaqua Coal Mine Museum opened in 1986 to commemorate local coal miners, especially the victims of this disaster.()The 2009 movie The Informant starring Damon was partially filmed in Moweaqua.()  The plot of the movie is based on the ADM price fixing scandal which occurred during the 1990s.  The scandal centered around ADM Vice President Whitacre who lived in Moweaqua during the time.  Filming reportedly took place at the former Whitacre residence as well as the local restaurant now known as The Hog Trough Too which Whitacre frequented while living there. The former Whitacre residence, located approximately 1 mile west of the Moweaqua city limits, was originally owned by the step-grandfather of former ABC president James E. Duffy. Mr. Duffy lived there for a time during his boyhood, and his time there, and his formative relationship with his step-grandfather, was documented in his 1997 autobiography, Stay Tuned.Local Businesses-Papa Ronnies Pizza & More-Halls Jewelry and Gifts -Moweaqua Foods -Moweaqua Bowl and Cafe-Timis Tours-Old Firehouse Auction -Ace Auto Repair-Gene Lower Insurance & Real Estate-Dollar General-Moweaqua Farmers MarketReferences(External links* Official Site - Moweaqua.Net* Mining More in Moweaqua 1889-1940ca:Moweaqua(Illinois)Ilinwanl:Moweaquapt:Moweaquavo:Moweaqua
111185
North_City,_Illinois
North City is a village in Franklin County, Illinois, in the States. The Census 2000s population estimate was 630.GeographyNorth City is located at  (37.993129, -89.065547).According to the Census Bureau, the village has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (1.79%) is water.North City is also known as Coello. Politics and Economics The current mayor is Dennis Harland.North City was the home of late Pete Moschino, who served as mayor of the city for 44 years. Moschino was a retired coal miner who helped establish many of the citys foundational utilities and landmarks.The only current commercial businesses are what is commonly called the Italian Club and, with regard to a disputed boundary, Simions Greenhouse.The village is what is left over from the thriving mining community of Old Ben 11, which closed down in 1953. Some surface parts of the mine still remain.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 630 people, 259 households, and 178 families residing in the village.  The density was 287.3 people per square mile (111.1/km).  There were 277 housing units at an average density of 126.3 per square mile (48.8/km).  The racial makeup of the village was 97.14% White, 0.32% African American, 0.32% Asian, 1.59% from other races, and 0.63% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.90% of the population.There were 259 households out of which 26.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.1% were married couples living together, 6.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.9% were non-families. 27.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 2.97.In the village the population was spread out with 22.9% under the age of 18, 8.7% from 18 to 24, 25.7% from 25 to 44, 25.1% from 45 to 64, and 17.6% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 104.5 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 102.5 males.The median income for a household in the village was $27,381, and the median income for a family was $36,250. Males had a median income of $29,375 versus $20,714 for females. The capita income for the village was $13,360.  About 14.1% of families and 19.6% of the population were below the line, including 29.5% of those under age 18 and 20.0% of those age 65 or over.References(External linksCityCity (Illinois)City, IlinwaCityCityCity
111440
Peru,_Illinois
Peru is a city in LaSalle County, Illinois, States. The population was 10,295 at the 2010 census. It is part of the Ottawa&ndash;Streator Micropolitan Statistical Area. Peru and its twin city, LaSalle, make up the core of the Illinois Valley.(http://www.ivaced.org/)GeographyPeru is located at  (41.334458, -89.127385).According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (1.82%) is water.Located on the Illinois River, Peru lies  west of the intersection of two major interstate highways: 39 and 80. The city is also the western terminus of the historic and Michigan Canal. Before the Waterway was constructed, the Illinois River was navigable only up to Peru. Rock State Park, a regional tourist attraction, is located  south-east of the community. Peru has a twin city on its eastern edge, LaSalle.DemographicsAs of the 2010 census there were 10,295 residents, 4,143 households, and 2,672 families residing in the city. The density was 1,655.5 people per square mile (639.3/km). There were 4,413 housing units at an average density of 742.8 per square mile (286.8/km). The racial makeup of the city was 96.47% White, 0.32% African American, 0.18% Native American, 1.11% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 1.16% from other races, and 0.75% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 4.08% of the population.There were 4,143 households out of which 27.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.7% were married couples living together, 7.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.5% were non-families. 31.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 15.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.33 and the average family size was 2.93.In the city the population was spread out with 22.0% under the age of 18, 7.5% from 18 to 24, 27.3% from 25 to 44, 21.9% from 45 to 64, and 21.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 89.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.9 males.The median income for a household in the city was $37,060, and the median income for a family was $48,180. Males had a median income of $39,722 versus $21,961 for females. The capita income for the city was $20,658. About 4.8% of families and 7.5% of the population were below the line, including 12.8% of those under age 18 and 4.7% of those age 65 or over.HistoryFile:Maud Powell Monument in Peru, Illinois.jpg|thumb|left|The Powell monument that stands on 4th Street in PeruThe city was organized as a borough in 1838, and was officially incorporated as a city on March 13, 1851. The original plat was between West Street, 4th Street, and East Street (now Pine Street).The citys first settler was John Hays, who arrived in 1830. The town became a successful river port, but with the construction of the & Michigan Canal, it was soon eclipsed by La Salle. After the closing of the Illinois & Michigan canal, Peru regained status as a port. The original downtown was on Water Street; little of it remains today. Road, northwest of town was originally a toll road meant to reach Illinois. The city is the birthplace and hometown of world renowned violinist Powell, who was born on 1112 Bluff Street, where the 251 bridge currently stands. The city was home to Turn Hall, which was the location of Maud Powells first performance.IndustryEarly on, Peru had a vibrant harvesting industry.The city was also the world headquarters of Westclox clock company. When Westclox closed, in the late 1970s, the population fell. The city is also the headquarters for Maze Lumber and Maze Nails - founded in 1848. The city was also home to Star Union Brewery, which closed in 1963 when it was bought out by Canadian Ace. The city also was home to James Barton, the inventor of the polygon mill, which stood in the north eastern section of town between 12 street, and Pulaski. Bartons home, which was called by local residents the castle due to its stone central turret, was adjacent to the mill, and still stands today.Early industries on Water Street include:Brunner Foundry and Machine Co, started 1868,(http://genealogytrails.com/ill/lasalle/Photos/Peru/nadlerHome.html) Illinois Zinc Works, and the Peru Plow and Wheel Company.MiningThere was coal mining in Peru. Known mines include:(http://www.isgs.uiuc.edu/maps-data-pub/coal-maps/topo-mines/lasalle.pdf) (http://www.isgs.uiuc.edu/maps-data-pub/coal-maps/topo-mines/spring-valley.pdf)*Union Mine, 1874-1949*Illinois Zinc No. 3 Mine, 1879-1947*McClernon Mine, 1909-1913*Merrick Mine, 1857-1873EducationBoth Peru and neighboring LaSalle share a High School, LaSalle-Peru Township High School, affectionately called L-P. L-P has the Cavaliers and Lady Cavaliers as its mascots, referencing Cavelier Rene Robert de LaSalle, who  discovered and established forts in the area. Economy The areas coal deposits helped make Peru a zinc manufacturing center in its early history (the manufacture of zinc requires large amounts of coal). Originally zinc ore was brought down from Illinois, by route of the Mississippi and Illinois rivers. In terms of transportation cost, Peru was the closest point to the Galena mines with readily available coal.In recent years, Peru has evolved into a regional commercial center, boasting a 76-store shopping mall (the largest within 75 miles) as well as several other national retailers. The area has also enjoyed the arrival of several small industrial/manufacturing firms. The completion of Interstate 39 in the early 1990s helped foster much of this new growth, making the city especially attractive to prospective distribution centers.Peru is home to the offices of Chemical Company, the largest manufacturer of permanganate in the world.  Maze Nail, one of Americas last nail makers, is located in Peru, Illinois as well.  Started in 1848, it is also one of the oldest continuously-operating businesses in Peru.Peru is also home to the national headquarters of American Nickeloid.Notable people*Virginius Bennes, architect.*P. Bettendorf and W. Bettendorf, industrialists.*Confrey, (18951971) composer and pianist.*Corwin, US Representative.*G. Dahl, politician.*Simon Ford, lion tamer.*Mike Goff, offensive lineman for the City Chiefs.*Gorgal, halfback for the Bay Packers.*Laub, great American.*Lourie, businessman, government official, and college football player.*Thomas Lynch, pitcher.*Russ Meyer, baseball player.*Hobart Morris, Justice of the Peace in Wyoming.*Powell, (18671920) violinist.*C. Ryan, Illinois Chief Justice.*John Skibinski, fullback for the Bears.*Vlastnik, theatre and television actor.ReferencesExternal links* City of Peru Official Site(Illinois)(Illinois)Illinois(Illinois)Ilinwa(Illinois)(Illinois)Illinois(Illinois)(Illinois)
111674
Bellflower,_Illinois
Bellflower is a village in McLean County, Illinois, States. The population was 408 at the 2000 census. It is part of the Bloomington&ndash;Normal Statistical Area.GeographyBellflower is located at  (40.340504, -88.526741).According to the States Census Bureau, the village has a total area of , all of it land.The Town was named for the Bellflower Apple.  Students from Bellflower attend the Blue Ridge School District.HistoryFounding of BellflowerBellflower was laid out on 26 August 1871 by George Nelson Black (15 March 1833  22 April 1908) and his wife Louisa J. Black (22 December 1840  23 December 1909). George was born in Berkshire County, Massachusetts, and had come to Illinois in 1850 where he became wealthy through manufacturing, mining, and railroads.(Historical Encyclopedia of Illinois and History of McLean County (Edited by Ezra M. Prince and John H. Burnham; 2 Vols; Chicago: Munsell, 1908) p. 2:902.)  Bellflower Township had subscribed $30,000 in twenty year bonds toward the construction of what was then called the Gilman, Clinton and Springfield Railroad. A condition of the funding was that the township would have a station on the railroad. Black purchased  of land, laid  out into town lots and then transferred the title to the Railroad. When the railroad became property of the Central Railroad, town lots in Bellflower were not transferred to that railroad.  The name of the town came from the name of the township and was selected by Jesse Richards, who was particularly fond of the Bellflower apple. It is perhaps the only town in Illinois named for an apple. In the 1870s it was often spelled Belle Flower or Belle-Flower.(History of Mclean County, Illinois (Chicago: LeBaron 1879) p.738.) Original plan and growth of BellflowerThe original plan of the town consisted of two square blocks of land. Most of the western square was divided into sixteen blocks, each usually containing twelve lots, and this part of the town was split diagonally by the  path of the railroad. Unlike many towns found in the 1870s, there was no Depot Ground. The eastern square of land and a strip along the north edge of the western square was divided into out lots, each of which were several times the size the lots in the western square. The combination of in lots and out lots was fairly common in central Illinois and may be found, for example, at Hudson and Chenoa. The small triangle of landcut off by the railroad from the remainder of block ten became thelocation of the town jail. The station was located on the south side of the tracks and the two early elevatorswere on railroad land. By 1895 both in lots and out lots held residences.(Combined Indexed Atlas 1856 - 1914, McLean County, Illinois (Bloomington: McLean County Historical Society and McLean County Genealogical Society, 2006) p. 106, 155.) R. E. Moreland established the first business. Bellflower quickly became a major grain shipping center serving the fertile surrounding land. By 1879 it was shipping over 350,000 bushels of grain a year.(History of McLean County, 1879, p. 739.) In 1900 the population was 356 and it is only slightly larger today.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 408 people, 162 households, and 117 families residing in the village. The density was 1,118.1 people per square mile (437.6/km). There were 171 housing units at an average density of 468.6 per square mile (183.4/km). The racial makeup of the village was 100.00% White.There were 162 households out of which 32.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 63.6% were married couples living together, 6.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.2% were non-families. 24.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 14.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.01.In the village the population was spread out with 24.8% under the age of 18, 7.8% from 18 to 24, 28.2% from 25 to 44, 23.3% from 45 to 64, and 15.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 96.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.1 males.The median income for a household in the village was $41,442, and the median income for a family was $45,625. Males had a median income of $34,375 versus $28,250 for females. The capita income for the village was $16,200. None of the families and 0.5% of the population were living below the line, including no under eighteens and 3.8% of those over 64.References(External links(Illinois)(Illinois)Ilinwa(Illinois)(Illinois)(Illinois)
112074
Crainville,_Illinois
Crainville is a village in Williamson County, Illinois, States. The population was 992 at the 2000 census.HistoryOne of the earliest mining communities in Williamson County. James M. Crain filed the first plat under the name of Crain City. However it incorporated as the village of Crainville on 28 June 1881. A post office opened 26 September 1888 also under the name Crainville. It discontinued operations 31 January 1914. Today the community is served by the neighboring post office at Carterville.(James N. Adams, comp. 1989. Illinois Place Names. Springfield, Ill.: Illinois State Historical Society. 332.)GeographyCrainville is located at  (37.748761, -89.065718).According to the States Census Bureau, the village has a total area of , all of it land.Demographics footnoteU.S. Census()As of the census of 2000, there were 992 people, 425 households, and 265 families residing in the village. The density was 709.9 people per square mile (273.6/km). There were 459 housing units at an average density of 328.5 per square mile (126.6/km). The racial makeup of the village was 97.78% White, 0.71% African American, 0.20% Native American, 0.20% Asian, 0.20% from other races, and 0.91% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.40% of the population.There were 425 households out of which 31.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.6% were married couples living together, 11.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.6% were non-families. 32.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.33 and the average family size was 3.01.In the village the population was spread out with 24.2% under the age of 18, 9.3% from 18 to 24, 29.8% from 25 to 44, 23.7% from 45 to 64, and 13.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 82.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 81.6 males.The median income for a household in the village was $35,750, and the median income for a family was $48,021. Males had a median income of $34,219 versus $20,972 for females. The capita income for the village was $17,911. About 6.6% of families and 8.8% of the population were below the line, including 7.0% of those under age 18 and 6.3% of those age 65 or over.References(Further reading* Erwin, Milo, and Jon Musgrave. 2006. The Bloody Vendetta of Southern Illinois. Marion, Ill.: IllinoisHistory.com. 240 pages.ca:Crainvillees:CrainvilleIlinwanl:Crainvillept:Crainvillevo:Crainville
112620
Dugger,_Indiana
Dugger is a town in Cass Township, Sullivan County, Indiana, States. The population was 920 at the 2010 census. It is part of the Terre Haute Metropolitan Statistical Area.HistoryDugger was settled in the late 1800s as a coal mining town.GeographyDugger is located at  (39.070911, -87.260116).According to the States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all of it land.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 955 people, 397 households, and 271 families residing in the town. The density was 1,641.1 people per square mile (635.7/km). There were 445 housing units at an average density of 764.7 per square mile (296.2/km). The racial makeup of the town was 98.85% White, 0.21% Native American, 0.31% from other races, and 0.63% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.84% of the population.There were 397 households out of which 29.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.7% were married couples living together, 10.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.7% were non-families. 28.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 19.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.94.In the town the population was spread out with 22.9% under the age of 18, 9.5% from 18 to 24, 26.2% from 25 to 44, 24.0% from 45 to 64, and 17.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 97.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.2 males.The median income for a household in the town was $31,071, and the median income for a family was $39,583. Males had a median income of $27,039 versus $19,000 for females. The capita income for the town was $15,255. About 4.6% of families and 7.8% of the population were below the line, including 5.8% of those under age 18 and 9.0% of those age 65 or over.TourismDugger is now home to the Dugger Coal Museum which contains local photographs and artifacts related to coal mining in and around Dugger and Sullivan County, Indiana.Just east of Dugger is the Redbird State Riding Area which is owned and operated by the Indiana Department Of Natural Resources. The Redbird mining operation produced 2 million tons of coal, until Redbird closed operations in 1950. Today the former mining land has been converted into camping and for off road sportsThe Redbird riding area features  of professionally marked, managed and maintained  OHV riding trails. Trails range from mild to wild and there is a trail that will fit anyones skill level. Redbirdsra.com is owned and maintained by the Redbird Foundation.References(ca:Dugger(Indiana)Indiananl:Duggerpt:Duggervo:Dugger
112772
Boone,_Iowa
footnotes                 Boone is a city in and the seat of Des Moines Township, Boone County, Iowa, United States.  It is the principal city of the Boone, Iowa Statistical Area, which encompasses all of Boone County. This micropolitan statistical area, along with the Iowa Statistical Area comprise the larger Ames-Boone, Iowa Statistical Area. The population of the city was 12,803 at the 2000 census.HistoryCoal mining played an important part in the early history of the Boone area.  Local blacksmiths were already mining coal from the banks of Honey Creek south of what would become Boone in 1849.thumb|left|300px|Map of the Boone area from 1908, showing the railroads and coal mines (shown in red) of the region.Boone was platted as a town in 1865, and incorporated the following year.  The and North Western Transportation Company reached Boone in 1866. In 1868, it was chartered as a city.  Commercial mining was spurred by the arrival of the railroad.  In 1867, Canfield and Taylor opened a mine just west of town.  Their shaft was 242 feet deep, and they hauled coal to the railroad by wagon.  In 1874, a railroad spur was built to the mine.  This mine was taken over by the railroad, and operated for 30 years.There are two seams in the Boone area, the upper vein, about 3 feet thick, was always worked using mining, while the lower vein was always mined using and pillar mining.(James H. Lees, History of Coal Mining in Iowa, Chapter III of  Annual Report, 1908, Iowa Geological Survey, 1909, pages 575579.)    In 1912, Mine Workers Local 869 in Boone had 554 members, close to 10% of the population at the time.(Tally Sheet, Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Convention of the United Mine Workers of America Jan. 16  Feb. 2, 1912, Indianapolis; Volume 2, page 182A.) GeographyBoone is located at  (42.061127, 93.886057).According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all of it land.Ledges State Park is located 4 miles south of Boone and is a staple tourist attraction.Demographics12803As of the census of 2000, there were 12,803 people, 5,313 households, and 3,363 families residing in the city. The population density was 1,433.9 people per square mile (553.6/km). There were 5,585 housing units at an average density of 625.5 per square mile (241.5/km). The racial makeup of the city was 98.34% White, 0.32% African American, 0.22% Native American, 0.21% Asian, 0.35% from other races, and 0.56% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.87% of the population.There were 5,313 households out of which 30.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.0% were married couples living together, 9.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.7% were non-families. 31.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 13.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.34 and the average family size was 2.94.In the city the population was spread out with 24.3% under the age of 18, 9.5% from 18 to 24, 27.2% from 25 to 44, 21.4% from 45 to 64, and 17.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 89.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.4 males.The median income for a household in the city was $38,179, and the median income for a family was $48,213. Males had a median income of $32,106 versus $22,119 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,995. About 5.4% of families and 8.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 10.9% of those under age 18 and 5.8% of those age 65 or over.  Transportation Boone is located on Highway 30.  The original Highway ran through the center of town, but a new 4-lane highway was built in the late 1960s that bypassed the center of Boone to the south. There is also a network of paved country roads radiating out in all directions.Boone is served by the mainline of the Pacific Railroad which purchased the & Northwestern Railroad (C&NW) in 1995.  Boone was a division and crew change point on the railroad under the Chicago & Northwestern and some of that business remains today.  There is a moderate-sized rail yard to the east of the downtown area. Traffic has increased quite a bit and there are some issues with traffic blockage and noise.  The locomotives no longer honk their horns in the town proper.Boone was also the exact midpoint on the Fort Dodge, Des Moines & Southern Railroad, an electric interurban line converted to diesel in 1955 after a flood on the Des Moines River devastated the Fraser hydroelectric powerplant that supplied power to the railroad . It connected with the C&NW downtown. It was purchased by the C&NW in 1968 and subsequently  abandoned.  The western part of the line to Fraser has been resurrected as the and Scenic Valley Railroad, a tourist line.The Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad also ran a branch line into Boone from the southeast.  It likewise connected with the C&NW.  The line was trimmed back to Luther in the late 1960s and completely abandoned a few years later.EconomyThe grocery chain Fareway is based in Boone. Notable people * Mamie Geneva Doud, wife of President D. Eisenhower.* Arthur Erbe,  was a Republican of Iowa from 1961 to 1963. He was born and resided in Boone.* McNertney, MLB player for the Seattle Pilots/Milwaukee Brewers, Louis Cardinals, and the Pirates.* Moran, an All American basketball player from High School and York Giants football star* Rinehart, an offensive lineman for the Bills.  In college he was an all-American for the of Northern Iowa.* Shelley, who averted a terrible train accident.* Lyman Wilbur, States Secretary of the Interior* Seiling , Founder of the town of OklahomaReferences(External links  *Official Boone City Website*Boone Area Chamber of Commerce*Vintage Life Magazine photos**City Data Detailed Statistical Data and more about Boone, Iowa()(Iowa)(Iowa)(Iowa)IowaIowa(Iowa)(Iowa)(Iowa)Iowa(Iowa)
113919
Newton,_Iowa
footnotes                 County, Iowa Courthouse.jpg|thumb|250px|Jasper County Courthouse, Newton, IowaImage:Maytaghqnight.jpg|thumb|250px|Former headquarters of the Corporation, Newton, Iowa.  Sold to Iowa Telecommunications Services Inc in January 2007thumb|250px|View of Maytag Dairy Farms from the visitor centerthumb|250px|Rabbit sculpture at Maytag Park, Newton, Iowa.  Dedicated in April 2006 in honor and memory of Ann Krumm. Newton is a city in and the seat of Jasper County, Iowa, States.  As of the 2000 census, the city population was 15,579.  It is the home of Dairy Farms and was formerly home to the Corporations corporate headquarters until the Corporation acquired it in 2006. It is also the location of Speedway.HistoryNewton was founded in 1850 and incorporated as a city in 1857. In the late 19th century, Newtons growth was fueled by the development of mines in the region.  The first significant mine in the area was the Couch mine of the Jasper County Coal and Railway Company, opened in the 1870s.  It was, for a while, the largest mine in the county, producing 70 tons per day.  William Snooks opened a mine near Newton in 1886.(James H. Lees, History of Coal Mining in Iowa, Chapter III of Annual Report, 1908, Iowa Geological Survey, 1909, pages 564-565.)  In the early 20th century, large scale mining in the Newton area had declined, but there were still several mines in the area that were worked intermittently.(Henry Hinds, The Coal Deposits of Iowa, Chapter I of Annual Report, 1908, Iowa Geological Survey, 1909, pages 161-163)In the 20th century, Newton was a manufacturing community, much of its growth derived from the washing machine industry.  Its most distinctive landmark, the Jasper County Courthouse, was built in 1911.Newton entered the national stage in 1938 when martial law was declared during a strike at the Maytag Washing Machine Company. Iowa governor Kraschel ordered the Iowa National Guard to protect the company with tanks and machine guns ready against the workers. With the backing of four troops (companies) of the 113th Cavalry Regiment,(Steven E. Clay, U.S. Army Order of Battle 1919 - 1941, Fort Leavenworth: Combat Studies Institute Press, p. 635.) Maytag company beat the strike and forced workers to return to work with a 10% pay cut.At the conclusion of World War II, the Maytag Washing Machine Company expanded its operations in Newton, becoming the Corporation.  Known for its dependable line of washing machines and clothes dryers, the company later persuaded the town of Newton to change the name of its headquarters address in the city to One Dependability Square.(Maytags Brand Blunder, BrandCultureTalk.com, 9 January 2009)  In 2001, a decision to cut labor costs resulted in a reduction of the labor force at the Newton plant in favor of newer Maytag facilities in Mexico.(Pitt, David, Moves to Mexico Fuel Fears at Maytag, Deseret News (Salt Lake City), 6 August 2003)  Layoffs at the Newton plant continued through 2005.  Whirlpools acquisition of Maytag in early 2006 led to speculation over the future of Maytag operations in Newton. On May 10, 2006, Whirlpool announced that it would close the Newton plant and corporate offices in the fall of 2007. The plant employed about 1,000 workers and the corporate offices employed about 800 at the time of the announcement.In January 2007 Whirlpool said in a statement that it sold most of the Maytag headquarters complex to Telecommunications Services Inc., a Newton-based telephone company which would use the complex to consolidate employees in a single location.Although the company did not disclose financial details, Newton economic development officials said Iowa Telecom paid $1.5 million for the buildings assessed at more than $12 million.(Ryberg Bill, Donnelle Eller, and Jennifer Jacobs. - Maytag to Close: What it Means to Newton. - Des Moines Register. - May 10, 2006.)The Maytag plant officially ended production on October 25, 2007.()In December 2007, Composites announced plans to open a plant to manufacture massive wind turbine blades,(http://www.expansionmanagement.com/statespotlights/Iowa/19327) which are now in production.(http://www.npr.org/templates/player/mediaPlayer.html?action1&t4&islisttrue&id2&d11-28-2008) President Obama visited the Trinity Structural Towers plant on 22 April 2009, that years Day.(http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/09/04/21/A-Busy-Earth-Day-Van-Jones-Video-All-Day-Live-Blog/)August 31, 1969, on approach to Newton Municipal Airport, a small plane (Cessna 172H) carrying former heavyweight boxing champion Marciano crashed into a tree in the middle of a corn field owned by Henry Eilander two miles south of Newton, killing Marciano, pilot Glenn Belz, and passenger Frank Farrell instantly.(http://www.ntsb.gov/ntsb/brief.asp?ev_id7749&key0)(http://www.check-six.com/Crash_Sites/MarcianoCessna.htm)GeographyNewtons longitude and latitude coordinates in decimal form are 41.698591, -93.046860. According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.ZIP codesAll addresses within Newton fall within the 50208 code.Streets and addressesNewton is divided into four quadrants: 1st Avenue divides the north and south segments of Newton, and 1st Street divides the east and west segments. Roads labeled as avenues run east and west, while roads labeled as streets run north and south. Newtons street numbering system also extends into rural Jasper County.A typical name would appear E 5th St S. The east or west label comes first, followed by the street, then followed by the north or south label. This example indicates the street is in the southeast quadrant of Newton.A typical avenue name would appear N 5th Ave W. In the case of avenues, the north or south label comes first, followed by the avenue, and then followed by the east or west label.  This example indicates the avenue is in the northwest quadrant of Newton.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 15,579 people, 6,713 households, and 4,269 families residing in the city.  The density was 1,518.9 people per square mile (586.3/km).  There were 7,162 housing units at an average density of 698.3 per square mile (269.5/km).  The racial makeup of the city was 97.55% White, 0.60% Asian, 0.39% African American, 0.22% Native American, 0.10% Pacific Islander, 0.33% from other races, and 0.80% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.21% of the population.There were 6,713 households out of which 29.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.4% were married couples living together, 9.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.4% were non-families. 32.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 14.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.84.In the city the population was spread out with 23.6% under the age of 18, 7.6% from 18 to 24, 27.2% from 25 to 44, 22.3% from 45 to 64, and 19.2% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 90.8 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.0 males.The median income for a household in the city was $40,345, and the median income for a family was $49,977. Males had a median income of $37,248 versus $22,631 for females. The capita income for the city was $20,552.  About 4.8% of families and 6.8% of the population were below the line, including 8.0% of those under age 18 and 6.4% of those age 65 or over.GovernmentNewton is administered by a mayor and a six-person city council.MayorThe mayor is elected to a term of two years.  Newtons current mayor is Charles Chaz Allen, who began his first term in January 2004.  His predecessor was David Aldridge, who served four terms from 1996-2004.City councilThe city council consists of one member elected from each of Newtons four wards and two members elected at-large.  The council members are elected to terms of four years.  Regular meetings of the city council are held on the first and third Mondays of each  month.State and federal representationThe States Postal Service operates the Newton Post Office.(Post Office Location - NEWTON. States Postal Service. Retrieved on November 24, 2010.)The Department of Corrections Correctional Facility is in unincorporated Jasper County, near Newton.(Newton Correctional Facility. Department of Corrections. Retrieved on November 24, 2010. Newton Correctional Facility 307 S. 60th Avenue W. P. O. Box 218 Newton, IA 50208)MediaRadio stations* KCOB 1280 AM / 95.9 FM  (Country)*  KRTI  106.7 FM  (Top 40/Pop)Print* Newton Daily NewsTelevision*  ION  Broadcast over air channel 39 Notable people  * Jay Clark, Olympic shooter* C. Cook, politician, lawyer, judge* Hough, author* F.L. Fritz Maytag III, businessman and entrepreneur* Charles Murray, American policy writer and researcher, co-author The Bell Curve* Spegal, poker player* Teut, former MLB playerPoints of interest* Arboretum and Botanical Gardens* Speedway* Dairy Farms* Park* & Mural Tours* Maison InnReferencesExternal links * Official City of Newton website* www.newton.k12.ia.us* www.visitnewton.com Newton Convention and Visitors Bureau* City Data Comprehensive Statistical Data and more about Newton(Iowa)(Iowa)(Iowa)Iowa(Iowa)Iowa(Iowa)(Iowa)(Iowa)Iowa(Iowa)
114326
Seymour,_Iowa
footnotes                 Seymour is a city in Wayne County, Iowa, States. The population was 810 at the 2000 census.HistoryThe first coal mines in Seymour were opened in 1884.  In 1902, the Numa Numa Block Coal Company took over these mines.(James H. Lees, History of Coal Mining in Iowa, Chapter III of Annual Report, 1908, Iowa Geological Survey, 1909, page 540.)  In 1908, Big Jim, Numa Block number 2 was 1 mile east of the Milwaukee and St. Paul Railway depot, was the largest coal mine in Appanoose-Wayne Coalfield, able to produce 100,000 tons per year at full capacity.  The Mystic coal seam was just over 2 feet thick here, reached by a 202 foot shaft.  Numa Block Mine number 3, the Sunshine Mine, was in the southeast part of town, served by the Rock Island, with a 240 foot shaft to the Mystic seam.(Henry Hinds, The Coal Deposits of Iowa, Annual Report, 1908, Iowa Geological Survey, 1909, page 260.)In 1884, Local Assembly 3143 of the of Labor, based in Seymour, had 40 members.(Part III, Labor Organizations: Knights of Labor, First Biennial Report of the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the State of Iowa, Geo. E. Roberts, Des Moines, 1885; page 55.)  In 1912, Mine Workers Local 206 in Seymour had 299 members, approximately 13% of the entire population.(Tally Sheet, Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Convention of the United Mine Workers of America Jan. 16 - Feb. 2, 1912, Indianapolis; Volume 2, page 180A.)GeographySeymour is located at  (40.682854, -93.120732).According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all of it land.TransportationSeymour is served by a county-maintained road which used to be Iowa Highway 55 and is now County Road S60.Seymour is served by the Iowa, Chicago and Eastern Railroad (IC&E) which currently operates the former Milwaukee Railroad tracks.Seymour was also served by the CRI&P (Rock Island) until the early 1980s.  This line passed on the southwest corner of the town square with the depot in this location.  This line was abandoned when the Rock Island went bankrupt.  It used to be part of the Golden State Route which was a luxury passenger train operated by the Rock Island and the Southern Pacific.The two railroad lines crossed at the western edge of Seymour and was protected by an interlocking tower until the Rock Island was abandoned.There had been talk of relaying the track from Allerton to Seymour on the old Rock Island right of way to provide a connection between the IC&E and the Union Pacific.  This idea has since been dropped due to the objections of the adjacent landowners.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 810 people, 336 households, and 219 families residing in the city. The density was 344.5 people per square mile (133.1/km). There were 393 housing units at an average density of 167.1 per square mile (64.6/km). The racial makeup of the city was 97.53% White, 0.37% Native American, 0.99% from other races, and 1.11% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.10% of the population.There were 336 households out of which 27.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.3% were married couples living together, 8.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.8% were non-families. 31.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 17.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.30 and the average family size was 2.89.In the city the population was spread out with 23.0% under the age of 18, 6.4% from 18 to 24, 24.9% from 25 to 44, 20.9% from 45 to 64, and 24.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females there were 91.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.8 males.The median income for a household in the city was $26,172, and the median income for a family was $32,692. Males had a median income of $24,531 versus $20,833 for females. The capita income for the city was $13,581. About 12.7% of families and 22.0% of the population were below the line, including 37.3% of those under age 18 and 12.3% of those age 65 or over.Notable residents* C. Mabee, thoroughbred racehorse owner/breeder* Collins, actor and singer part of Texas TenorsReferences((Iowa)(Iowa)IowaIowa(Iowa)(Iowa)(Iowa)Iowa(Iowa)
114754
Cherryvale,_Kansas
footnotes                 Cherryvale is a city in Montgomery County, Kansas, States. The population was 2,386 at the 2000 census.GeographyCherryvale is located at  (37.268010, -95.550778). According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (1.27%) is water. Is self-described as the Gateway to Hill Lake.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 2,386 people, 982 households, and 639 families residing in the city. The density was 1,537.2 people per square mile (594.3/km). There were 1,142 housing units at an average density of 735.7 per square mile (284.5/km). The racial makeup of the city was 94.09% White, 0.08% African American, 1.97% Native American, 0.13% Asian, 1.30% from other races, and 2.43% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.77% of the population.There were 982 households out of which 31.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.7% were married couples living together, 11.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.9% were non-families. 31.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 15.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 2.98.In the city the population was spread out with 26.8% under the age of 18, 8.2% from 18 to 24, 26.9% from 25 to 44, 21.2% from 45 to 64, and 16.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 91.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.2 males.The median income for a household in the city was $27,917, and the median income for a family was $33,599. Males had a median income of $25,964 versus $19,356 for females. The capita income for the city was $13,655. About 13.0% of families and 18.9% of the population were below the line, including 26.4% of those under age 18 and 15.7% of those age 65 or over.HistoryCherryvale was founded on the land of the Osage Indians who were pushed out by veterans of the Civil War looking for land. The first white man to purchase property and settle here was Mr. Abe Eaton, who later sold it to the City, Lawrence & Southern Kansas Railroad which then became the Lawrence & Galveston Railway. The town site was plotted by the railroad in May 1871at a time in which the 1870 U.S. Census had already reported 435 pioneering men, women and children taking up residence on a location named for its beautiful spring cherry blossoms.From 1871-1873 the Benders, later called the Benders, set up an inn outside of town and killed at least 12 travellers including one child. While the Benders hold a tragic and morbid story, they are famous in the area.By 1880, the U.S. Census counted 620 Cherryvale residents, a number that swelled to 3,472 by 1900.In late 1903, Cherryvale was deeply affected by the death of its city marshal, William G. Jones, who was shot while attempting to serve an arrest warrant to a local resident.  On the day of his funeral, the entire community closed as all residents attended his funeral.The town grew exponentially as a railroad hub, becoming a leader in zinc mining, glass and brick production.  The Edgar Zinc Company was once the worlds largest zinc smeltering facility.  By 1920, 4,698 people called Cherryvale home, and in 1925 the community featured 20 groceries, 10 restaurants, 2 theatres (the Liberty Theatre and the Royal Theatre), 11 churches, and a Cherryvale Business College. There were also six brick plants that used the abundant natural gas of the area to fuel their kilns cheaply.  Cherryvale once lay on the 90-mile route of the electric interurbans run by the Union Traction Company, with trolley tracks occupying the center of Main Street until 1947.  Local boys during the 1930s liked to soap the trolley rails as a prank, halting the progress of interurban cars until a motorman climbed down and applied sand.  By 1940, the local brickyards had ceased production, and population declined to 3,185 inhabitants.   Since the 1970s- with the loss of light manufacturing firms- the number of the towns residents has dwindled further.  The high school ball teams were renamed the Cherryvale Chargers because the original team name-- The Fighting Cherries-- conjured up images of a soft, sweet nature that did not inspire sufficient respect.  Today the cherry trees of frontier Cherryvale exist only in local lore.The city is currently the headquarters for the Kansas and Oklahoma Railroad, a shortline that runs 511 miles of track in Kansas and Oklahoma.EducationUSD 447 is home to Lincoln Central Elementary School (Cherryvale) (K-6), Thayer Elementary (K-8) and Cherryvale Middle/High School (7-12). They compete in the Tri-Valley League and the mascot is the Charger, represented by a knight. It was previously the Fighting Cherries.The mascot was changed in 1969 by the high school student council after an overwhelming vote of the student body.Notable nativesImage:Santa Fe Route Map 1891.jpg|thumb|200px|right|1891 Topeka & Santa Fe Railway route map from Grain Dealers and Shippers Gazetteer.* Avey, wrestling promoter* Brooks, dancer, silent film star, and author* Wendell Horton, Sr., geophysicist, acoustic researcher* Sandow, manager for World Champion Ed Strangler Lewis* Vance, actress who played Mertz on Love LucyReferencesExternal links* City website* Cherryvale Police Department* Cherryvale Museum* 1912 Kansas: a cyclopedia of state history(Kansas)(Kansas)KansasKansas(Kansas)(Kansas)fi:Cherryvale(Kansas)
115330
Salyersville,_Kentucky
Salyersville is a city in and the seat of Magoffin County, Kentucky, States. It is located on the River. The population was 1,604 at the 2000 census.HistoryIn 1794 after the Revolutionary War, the first European-American settlement was attempted by Archibald Prater, John Williams, Ebenezer Hanna, Clayton Cook, but they were driven out by Native Americans who had long inhabited the territory. The pioneer Americans returned six years later in 1800 and built the fort of Licking Station on a hill in the Horse Shoe Bend of the River.  This was just outside of present-day city limits.As the town grew through the decades, it was given the name Adamsville for one of the town founders, Uncle Billie Adams. Adams owned extensive farm land, a hotel, a gristmill, a tannery and a blacksmith shop in the area. The area was settled mostly by independent subsistence farming families.  Few were slaveholders in eastern Kentucky.In 1860, Magoffin County was formed from parts of the surrounding Floyd, Johnson, and Morgan Counties. The name was chosen for the Kentucky State Governor at the time, Magoffin, who served from 1859 to 1862. On February 22, 1860, the city of Adamsville had an official name change to Salyersville for the legislator, Samuel Salyer, who sponsored the creation of Magoffin County.During the Civil War (18611865), Salyersville fell on hard times. Because of its location in the Upper South and history of settlement by migrants from Virginia, some residents sided with the Confederacy.  Because few of the residents were slaveholders and had struggled for a political voice in the state, many were supporters of the Union. In 1864, Union forces defeated a Confederate raiding force at the of Salyersville.In 1871, Uncle Billie Adams gave land to Salyersville to build a courthouse and other public buildings. In 1890, the Magoffin Countys first house was completed. (It stood for 67 years, but burned to the ground in 1957).The Magoffin County Institute, Salyersvilles first high school, was founded in 1908 by A.C. Harlowe.The Depression (1930s - 1940s) caused much suffering in Salyersville. A high percentage of Salyersvilles citizens were employed or self-employed laborers. Farmers suffered as prices for crops fell by 40-60%; mining and logging areas suffered unemployment when demand for their products fell sharply. In 1939, storms drove the Licking River to crest over 25 feet, flooding most of downtown Salyersville and causing extensive property damage. The local economy suffered.In 1963, the T. Combs Mountain Parkway is completed, stretching west 76 miles from Salyersville to intersect with 64 at a point just east of Kentucky. It enabled more tourists to visit the area, and heritage tourism began to help Salyersville develop a changed economy.The first annual Magoffin County Founders Day Festival was held in 1978.In the winter of 1997, as part of Kentuckys elk restoration project, Salyersville became one of the locations selected for the release of elk into the wilderness area of the mountains.In 2002 the second Magoffin County court house, built in 1960, was demolished. In its place, a new Justice Center was constructed, which opened in Spring 2006. The new Justice Centers architecture plays tribute to Magoffin Countys original House.Poverty has long been a burden of the area surrounding Salyersville. As of 2006, Magoffin County was one of the poorest counties in the United States. The county is the 42nd poorest county by per capita income and the 24th poorest county by median household income.GeographySalyersville is  North, 83347 West (37.748171, -83.062984).According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.Land UseCulture Cultural events & fairs * Founders Day - Founders day is an annual county festival for the people of County.  It attracts those who have roots in eastern Kentucky and others who are interested in the genealogy and history of the area.  A different family surname is celebrated each year as part of the festival.The Festival offers young people opportunities to enter contests and win prize money for excelling in academic subjects such as math, spelling, essay writing, and art. Pageants are held for young people from age 1-day to age 14 for boys and girls and for young women from age 17 to age 26. A parade, drama & fashion shows, pet shows, clogging, other dance exhibitions, and specialty acts are just a few of the festivities that are part of Founders Day. http://www.rootsweb.com/~kymhs/founders.htm* Street Dance - Each year there is a public dance in downtown Salyersville. The intersection surrounding the downtown courthouse was blocked off for the event which went well into the night.* Independence Day Festival - Independence Day is celebrated in Salyersville with a parade and pageants.Parks and outdoor attractions* Pioneer Village - Located near downtown Salyersville, Pioneer Village is a complex of 15 original cabins that have been restored and preserved through the efforts of the Magoffin County Historical Society.(http://www.rootsweb.com/~kymhs/) Together the cabins form a history museum, where staff create displays and demonstrations of early crafts. The cabins in Pioneer Village often date back to the early 19th century. Donated cabins are disassembled with care, the logs numbered and cleaned, and they are transported and reassembled in the Pioneer Village.* Ramey Memorial Park - This park offers picnic shelters, tables, a playground, a walking track, courts, courts, and fields as well as a pool (open during the summer). The park has access to a steel bridge that crosses the Licking River, connecting the park to the historic Pioneer Village and a monument commemorating veterans of war from Magoffin County.(http://www.kaht.com/multiple/fiddleheadtrail/rameymemorial.htm)Monuments* Several marble monuments are located downtown near the Pioneer Village cabins, including the Founders Pyramid, a surname marker, a county marker, an Civil War memorial, and a memorial soldiers bell. The George Golden Hawk Sizemore grave and monument http://www.findagrave.com/cgi-bin/fg.cgi?pagegr&GRid27832833 sits at the Mouth of Oakly Cemetery, and the Tip Top coal camp marker sits at the head of the creek.http://www.rootsweb.com/~kymhs/memorials.htmHistorical Markers* Civil War Action - This marker, located near Puncheon Creek in Salyersville, states: On mission to clear area of CSA forces, Col. Geo. W. Gallup with USA troops repulsed Confederate attack led by Lt. Colonel E. F. Clay at Paintsville April 13, 1864, and pursued enemy to this point. Union men attacked next day. Clay was mortally wounded: CSA suffered 60 casualties and 60 men, 200 horses, 400 saddles, 300 small-arms taken. USA sustained only slight losses.* County Named, 1860 - This marker, located in downtown Salyersville, describes the biography of Gov. Beriah Magoffin, the county namesake.* First Settlement - This marker at the eastern Salyersville city limits describes the founding of the town by European Americans.* Ivy Point Skirmishes - This marker on Ivy Point Hill tells of skirmishes during the Civil War.* Patrick Grave - This marker notes a Civil War action by Patrick, who also served as a Kentucky state legislator, 1863-1867.* Wm. Uncle Billie Adams - This marker in the downtown tells a short biography of one of the founders.MediaThe local weekly newspapers in Salyersville include The Salyersville Independent and the Trading Post, mostly for advertising.  Founded in 1921, The Salyersville Independent circullates over 4,000 copies every Thursday.  It is currently owned and published by David Prater.Cable service in Salyersville is provided by Rick Howard Cable, Frank Howard Cable and Foothills Cooperative. Through these companies, Salyersville is provided with standard and premium cable TV service, high-speed Internet access and telephone service. Frank Howard Cable and Rick Howard Cable offer local programming via MCTV (Magoffin County Television) and MCSTV (Magoffin County School TV), a channel dedicated to local school programming. MCTV carries a daily local news media program Your News Today.Salyersvilles radio stations include the local WRLV (AM/FM) Pure Country 106.5 and 1140. Stations of surrounding counties can also be heard, such as Prestonsburgs WQHY (FM) 95.5 , Paintsvilles WKLW (FM) 94.7, and West Libertys Kick 102.9.Infrastructure Education Salyersvilles public schools are operated by the County Board of Education. Salyersvilles County High School mascot is the Hornets.Other public schools in Salyersville are the Herald Whitaker Middle School, North Magoffin Elementary, Salyersville Elementary School, and South Magoffin ElementaryFoundersThe fathers of Salyersville are :* William Uncle Billy Adams (18021881) - Founder of Adamsville, now known as Salyersville.* Samuel The Legislator Salyer (18121890) - Founder and Kentucky state legislator, for whom  Salyersville was named.* Archibald Prater (17551831) - Frontiersman who first settled the land that is now Salyersville.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000,, there were 1,604 people, 646 households, and 414 families residing in the city. The density was 758.1 people per square mile (292.1/km). There were 710 housing units at an average density of 335.6 per square mile (129.3/km). The racial makeup of the city was 99.69% White, 0.06% African American, and 0.25% Native American.  0.31% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.There were 646 households out of which 27.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.4% were married couples living together, 12.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.9% were non-families. 33.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 14.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.22 and the average family size was 2.85.In the city the population was spread out with 20.8% under the age of 18, 9.2% from 18 to 24, 26.1% from 25 to 44, 24.1% from 45 to 64, and 19.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 88.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 83.1 males.The median income for a household in the city was $16,042, and the median income for a family was $23,393. Males had a median income of $26,534 versus $20,188 for females. The capita income for the city was $11,881. About 35.7% of families and 40.7% of the population were below the line, including 56.4% of those under the age of 18 and 34.3% of those 65 and older.ReferencesExternal links* The Magoffin County Historical Society* The Magoffin County Muzzleloaders Clubca:Salyersville(Kentucky)fr:SalyersvilleKentuckyKentuckynl:Salyersvillept:SalyersvilleKentuckyKentuckyvo:Salyersville
116003
Surry,_Maine
Surry is a town in Hancock County, Maine, States. The population was 1,361 at the 2000 census.GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (27.51%) is water.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 1,361 people, 551 households, and 404 families residing in the town.  The density was 36.5 people per square mile (14.1/km).  There were 913 housing units at an average density of 24.5 per square mile (9.5/km).  The racial makeup of the town was 96.84% White, 0.15% African American, 0.59% Native American, 0.37% Asian, 0.07% from other races, and 1.98% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.37% of the population.There were 551 households out of which 30.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.8% were married couples living together, 7.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.5% were non-families. 21.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 2.84.In the town the population was spread out with 24.5% under the age of 18, 4.6% from 18 to 24, 26.3% from 25 to 44, 31.3% from 45 to 64, and 13.4% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 97.0 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.7 males.The median income for a household in the town was $36,932, and the median income for a family was $41,324. Males had a median income of $30,871 versus $22,100 for females. The capita income for the town was $19,199.  About 11.4% of families and 14.6% of the population were below the line, including 22.5% of those under age 18 and 9.5% of those age 65 or over.HistorySurry is situated on the west bank of Union River bay, in Hancock County. On the north-east it is bounded by Ellsworth, on the south-west, by Blue Hill, on the west, by Orland and Penobscot. The town has an area of about . Toddy Pond forms part of the boundary between Surry and Penobscot, and on the line between Surry and Ellsworth are the two Patten ponds whose outlet is Patten Stream. Fishways were constructed to these ponds in 1872, and the ponds have since been stocked with alewives and salmon. The surface of the town is considerably broken. The land generally is valuable for tillage. The most of the surface soil is so intermingled with comminuted quartz, or siliceous sand, that cranberries grow in the grass fields. The cultivation of this crop is receiving increased attention. A large deposit of nearly pure silica in the town may prove of much value for glass and other ware. Over miles of surface on the Toddy Pond road lay, a few years ago, a bleak profusion of granite boulders. To-day those boulders are seen in every stage of ruin. On every hand they are smitten with decay, and here and there a patch of unworn gravel is all that remains of a once great boulder. A few miles beyond. these, is a field of immense boulders, still uncrumbled, lying in wild confusion boulder on boulder.The manufactories of Surry are a lumber, shingle, spool and two stave mills. Formerly there was a large business done in building small vessels, but it is now very much reduced. Surry has two mining companies, the Blue Hill Bay and the East Surry Company.Surry was Township No. 6, in the grant to Marsh and others. It was first occupied by the French at Newbury Neck. The first English settlers were Symonds, Weymouth and James Flye. The next settlers were John Patten, a Mr. Hopkinson, Andrew Flood, Wilbrahim Swett, Matthew and James Ray, Samuel Joy, Isaac Lord, Hezekiah Coggins and Leonard Jarvis. Mr. Jarvis represented the eastern district in Congress from 1831 to 1837.Up to 1820, about  had been secured to settlers and by quiet possession titles, when Mr. Jarvis bought the remainder. In 1800, Surry included that portion of Ellsworth known as Ward 5; but in 1829 it was re-annexed to Ellsworth. There was a population of 289 as early as 1790. In 1874, a small quantity of silver coin was found at Weymouth Point. Surry furnished 135 men to the Union cause in the war of the Rebellion!The Baptist, Free Baptist and Methodist denominations have churches in town. There are nine public schoolhouses, and the school property is valued at $3,400. The valuation of estates in 1870 was $207,137. In 1880 it was $177,534. The population in 1870 was 1,242. In 1880 it was 1,185.(From George J. Varneys A Gazetteer of the State of Maine, published in Boston, Massachusetts in 1886:)RecentThe National Weather Service in Caribou, Maine established a cooperative weather station at East Surry, Maine in July 2007. The NWS station named, Ellsworth-3SSW serves as an official meteorological recording site, providing daily weather and climate information to the (NWS) National Weather Service, (NCDC) National Climatic Data Center, CoCoRaHS (Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network), and CWOP (Citizens Weather Observer Program). The station (Ellsworth-3SSW) continues the climate history of Ellsworth, Maine dating back to the 1930s. The cooperative station is located at an elevation of 105 feet about 2 miles east of Surry village.The National Weather Service in Caribou, Maine renamed the station to EAST SURRY on July 1, 2011... This station begins a new climate history for East Surry, as it was found to be not compatible to the old ELLSWORTH POLL CONTROL station. The new data set begins on JUNE 1, 2007 from the East Surry location.ReferencesExternal links*(Maine)(Maine)Maine(Maine)
116347
Lansdowne-Baltimore_Highlands,_Maryland
 Lansdowne-Baltimore Highlands is a place (CDP) in Baltimore County, Maryland,  States. The census area is made up of the unincorporated communities of Lansdowne and Baltimore Highlands. The population was 15,724 at the 2000 census.HistoryIn the late 1800s the Whitaker Iron Co. mined for ore in Lansdowne. Abandoned pits from the mining were filled up by underground springs creating small ponds and lakes. Lansdowne was mostly farmland including the Kessler farm, MacLeod farm and Wades farm. The name Lansdowne came from the British who named it after the Prime Minister William Petty, the of Lansdowne.When the railroad came Lansdowne became known as a B&O town. Most people worked for B&O, commuting by train into City. The first station was named Coursey Station. The current Coursey Station senior housing center takes its name from this.The two main roads were Hammonds Ferry Road and Hollins Ferry Road, both of which led to the River where you could take a ferry across to the other side.Early churches included the Lutheran Church of Our Savior, St. Clements Catholic Church, Lansdowne United Methodist Church, Lansdowne Christian Church and the First Baptist Church of Lansdowne. The site of the original wooden school house was on the property that is now St. Clements.In the area known as Baltimore Highlands is a legendary mansion called English Consul. The land and house were owned by William Dawson, the first English Consul to Maryland. One legend claims that Dawson had a brother who was transported from England to America in disgrace. Each year he was to receive a whip lashing as punishment for the crime he had committed. This took place on the English Consul estate. Another legend has it that the mansion was a stop on the Railroad before the Civil War. In 1909 a developer purchased the estate. It was eventually divided into the areas known as Baltimore Highlands, Rosemont, Friendship Gardens and the small section still called English Consul.In the 1950s housing developments sprang up in the Baltimore Highlands and Riverview areas. Schools were built for these neighborhoods. In Lansdowne the Lansdowne Elementary School, Lansdowne Junior High (middle school) and Lansdowne Senior High were known as the Golden Education Triangle.In the early 1960s the B&O closed the railroad crossing and Lansdowne Boulevard was constructed, connecting Lansdowne to Washington Boulevard, bridging over the railroad tracks. A tunnel was also constructed under the tracks for pedestrian crossing. Some old railroad cars were erected as a museum and shopping area alongside Hammonds Ferry Road and the railroad tracks.In the 1980s Baltimore County Recreation and Parks opened a large parcel of land for public use. Southwest Area Park is located on the Patapsco River just below Baltimore Highlands.A small library was built by Baltimore County in 1966, on Third Avenue. In 1993 the Lansdowne Library was closed due to budget cutbacks. The building is now used as the Southwest Community Center and serves the areas needs for adult education and other county services. In 1989 the Lansdowne/Baltimore Highlands Senior Center was built directly behind the library building. In 2006 the Library was reopened.Source: Baltimore County Public Library TransitThe Light Rail passes through the community, with a stop in Baltimore Highlands.GeographyLansdowne-Baltimore Highlands is located at  (39.238782, -76.651246).According to the States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (4.21%) is water.RoadsLansdowne RoadLansdowne Road, a main road which travels through the suburbs of Lansdowne, Maryland and minutes away from South Baltimore (city). The road starts at Road which the road name is Avenue, and continues to Ferry Road, then the name changes to Lansdowne Road continuing past High School to Ferry Road, then to US-1 or as Washington Boulevard.Hollins Ferry RoadThe road starts at Halethorpe Farms Road in the Halethorpe area which continues past I-695, then crosses the Baltimore (city) line after passing Road/Avenue to Avenue then ends at US-1/Washington Boulevard.Hammonds Ferry RoadHammonds Ferry Road starts at Andover Road in Linthicum Heights, Maryland, then crosses in the Lansdowne area passing I-695/Anne Arundel County line. Then hits Hollins Ferry Road, then continues until it hits Avenue/Avenue.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 15,724 people, 5,796 households, and 4,190 families residing in the CDP. The density was 3,836.8 people per square mile (1,480.7/km). There were 6,041 housing units at an average density of 1,474.1 per square mile (568.9/km). The racial makeup of the CDP was 75.70% White, 18.37% African American, 0.36% Native American, 1.86% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 1.74% from other races, and 1.95% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.54% of the population.There were 5,796 households out of which 39.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.0% were married couples living together, 24.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.7% were non-families. 21.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 7.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.71 and the average family size was 3.11.In the CDP the population was spread out with 29.6% under the age of 18, 10.6% from 18 to 24, 30.4% from 25 to 44, 19.2% from 45 to 64, and 10.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females there were 89.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 83.9 males.The median income for a household in the CDP was $37,160, and the median income for a family was $41,559. Males had a median income of $33,244 versus $22,906 for females. The capita income for the CDP was $16,348. About 12.7% of families and 13.8% of the population were below the line, including 20.6% of those under age 18 and 6.7% of those age 65 or over.References(External links* Lansdowne Improvement AssociationHighlandsHighlands (Maryland)Highlands (Maryland)HighlandsHighlandsHighlands
117501
Bessemer,_Michigan
footnotes                 Bessemer is a city in the state of Michigan.  As of the 2010 census, the city population was 1,914.  It is the seat of Gogebic County.The city is situated within Bessemer Township, but is politically independent. It is on US 2 with Ironwood several miles to the west and Wakefield several miles to the east. The Big Powderhorn, Blackjack and Indianhead ski areas are located within a few miles of Bessemer.  Cross-country skiing and snowmobiling are also very popular in this area known as Big Snow country because of heavy snowfall influenced by nearby Superior.HistoryBessemer was incorperated in 1884 as the mining of ore and copper started growing througout the Gogebic Range. The town was erected county seat in 1887 and the courthouse was built. The town then grew to a boomtown of stores, motels, gas stations, and resturaunts. The town slowly started falling apart after the closing of the mines. The town is nowpeaceful with a few gas stations and some other businesses.GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.DemographicsAs of the census of 2010, there were 1,914 people, 976 households, and 569 families residing in the city.  The density was 392.9 per square mile (151.6/km).  There were 1,179 housing units at an average density of 215.6 per square mile (83.2/km).  The racial makeup of the city was 96.88% White, 0.14% African American, 1.21% Native American, 0.42% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.42% from other races, and 0.88% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.70% of the population. 23.3% were of Italian, 18.7% Finnish, 13.8% German, 11.3% Polish and 5.7% Swedish ancestry according to 2000.There were 976 households out of which 25.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.1% were married couples living together, 9.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41.6% were non-families. 38.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 21.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.17 and the average family size was 2.88.In the city the population was spread out with 23.0% under the age of 18, 6.4% from 18 to 24, 24.4% from 25 to 44, 23.3% from 45 to 64, and 22.9% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females there were 96.2 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.3 males.The median income for a household in the city was $27,639, and the median income for a family was $36,739. Males had a median income of $28,958 versus $21,708 for females. The capita income for the city was $17,499.  About 8.6% of families and 12.1% of the population were below the line, including 17.0% of those under age 18 and 7.9% of those age 65 or over.Notable people*W. Johnson, member of the States House of Representatives from Wisconsin*Redner, halfback for H. Yosts 1901 Point-a-Minute football team Transportation *25px US-2 is one of the Upper Peninsulas longest highways, stretching from St. Ignace to neighboring Ironwood and on to Duluth.Intercity bus service is provided by Trails Line, while Gogebic County operates a small public bus system.Commercial air service is available at the County Airport (IWD) north of Ironwood.  Airlines operates flights from Ironwood to Rhinelander, Wisconsin; and Milwaukee, Wisconsin (via Rhinelander).  From Rhinelander, passengers may also fly to Minneapolis, Minnesota (MSP) with Connection.References((Michigan)(Mchigan)(Michigan)(Michigan)(Michigan)(Michigan)
117606
Laurium,_Michigan
 refnum  04001578()}}Laurium is a village in Calumet Township, Houghton County in the state of Michigan, in the center of the peninsula.  The population was 2,126 at the 2000 census.Historyleft|thumb|George Gipp MemorialUntil 1895 Laurium was known as Calumet (not to be confused with the present nearby town of Calumet, Michigan, which was known as Red Jacket until it adopted the name Calumet in 1929).  In 1895 the legislature changed Calumets name to Laurium, after the famous mining town in ancient Greece.  Laurium is located in the center of the Country, the first major mining region in the United States. It was originally founded as a town serving the Laurium copper mine, which later became part of the Calumet & Hecla mine. The town was generally home to the wealthier members of Keweenaw society, such as mine owners and captains. Although the mines have long since closed down, the town still sports many large houses and mansions built by the wealthy mine owners. Today, many of the houses are participating locations in the Keweenaw National Historical Park.The population in 1900 was 5643, of whom 2286 were foreign-born.Noted 20th Century football player Gipp (the Gipper) was born in Laurium.  A small memorial for the football legend is located on the corner of Lake Linden Avenue and Tamarack Street and his grave is in nearby Lake View Cemetery.( )The Palestra was a noted hockey arena, built in Laurium in 1904. It is thought to have been the first purpose-built indoor hockey venue in the States. In 1921, the entire arena was moved to Marquette, Michigan and remained there until it was torn down in 1974.Laurium Historic Districtleft|thumb|Houseleft|thumb|Streetscapeleft|thumb|Streetscapeleft|thumb|Streetscape on Pewabic StreetIn 2005, the Laurium Historic District was listed on the Register of Historic Places.(  The district is roughly bounded by Calumet Street on the west and south, Stable Street on the north, and North Florida and Isle Royale Streets on the east.  This area contains the entire village of Laurium save two areas added in the 1970s.(Recognition of Laurium Historic District from the National Park Service Keeweenaw Historical Park, posted May 4, 2006, retrieved 8/24/09)The vast majority of the structures in Laurium were constructed during the 35 years between 1880 and 1915, and the common architectural styles in the village reflect what was popular at the time.(Over 90% of the structures in the historic district are residential in nature, and most of those are single-family houses.(National Register Nomination form)  Probably the grandest of these is the H. Hoatson House (now known as the Laurium Manor Inn), a large Revival style house.(  The most common houses are more modest in scale and ornamentation, with two-story front-gabled houses of predominantly frame construction being the most common.(Five churches and two schools are spread through the community, and most commercial structures are near the intersection of Hecla and Third Streets; this includes the Vivian, Jr. and Company Building, which is separately listed on the National Register.(  These buildings are often constructed of brick and/or sandstone.(GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau, the village has a total area of , all land.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 2,126 people, 897 households, and 540 families residing in the village.  The density was 3,163.7 per square mile (1,225.2/km).  There were 1,082 housing units at an average density of 1,610.1 per square mile (623.5/km).  The racial makeup of the village was 98.12% White, 0.24% African American, 0.61% Native American, 0.19% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.19% from other races, and 0.61% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.52% of the population. 38.9% were of Finnish, 9.6% German, 9.1% Italian, 7.5% French and 7.2% English ancestry according to 2000.There were 897 households out of which 28.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.7% were married couples living together, 10.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.7% were non-families. 37.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 19.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 3.14.In the village the population was spread out with 26.5% under the age of 18, 7.2% from 18 to 24, 23.9% from 25 to 44, 22.2% from 45 to 64, and 20.1% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 93.1 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.0 males.The median income for a household in the village was $30,404, and the median income for a family was $40,556. Males had a median income of $28,571 versus $23,824 for females. The capita income for the village was $16,686.  About 8.8% of families and 12.4% of the population were below the line, including 12.6% of those under age 18 and 14.5% of those age 65 or over.EducationThe Calumet-Laurium-Keweenaw (C-L-K) School District, established in 1867, remains one of the most populous school districts in the area. It serves the two towns named, as well as almost all of Keweenaw County.Notable residents* Gipp - University of Notre Dame football star* Ross - philanthropist, newspaper columnist* Quello - FCC Commissioner and broadcast pioneerImagesFile:LauriumMichiganSign.jpg|SignFile:LauriumMichiganPark.jpg|ParkReferencesExternal links*Laurium Official Website*Keweenaw National Historical Park Website*Laurium Manor Inn(Mchigan)(Michigan)pt:Lauriumvo:Laurium
118234
Greg_Flesch
Greg Flesch (born 1960) is a guitarist and musician, best known for his work with the rock bands Amos and Swirling Eddies (credited as Gene Pool). Flesch joined D.A. in 1984, just in time for the Vox Humana tour. Besides his work with D.A., Flesch was also heavily involved in the 1991 Various Artists album, At the Foot of the Cross Volume One, produced by Daugherty and Hindalong. Flesch also produced Scott Taylors second solo album, Briefing for the Ascent. Flesch also works in the Laser Spectroscopy Group at the Propulsion Laboratory in California, writing software for the groups tunable-laser spectrometers flown onboard NASAs ER-2 aircraft, balloon, and spacecraft. Flesch also writes software to aid in the reduction, analysis and mining of spectral data.External links* Greg Flesch at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
119075
Caledonia_Township,_Shiawassee_County,_Michigan
footnotes                 Caledonia Charter Township is a township of Shiawassee County in the state of Michigan.  The population was 4,427 at the 2000 census.Communities*Middletown is an community within the township between Corunna and Owosso.(shiawasseehistory.com Village and City Histories of Shiawassee County, Michigan)()*Kerby is an community within the township on Kerby Road.  State maps place it at Serr Road(SHIAWASSEE County Map. J. Shively.  State of Michigan Department of Information Technology Technology Center for Genographic Information.  September 2007.) while the Federal government place it on Shipman Road from Kerby Road., ()GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau, the township has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (0.38%) is water.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 4,427 people, 1,712 households, and 1,287 families residing in the township.  The density was 139.8 per square mile (54.0/km).  There were 1,794 housing units at an average density of 56.7 per square mile (21.9/km).  The racial makeup of the township was 97.24% White, 0.14% African American, 0.32% Native American, 0.61% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.68% from other races, and 0.99% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.65% of the population.There were 1,712 households out of which 32.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 63.4% were married couples living together, 8.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.8% were non-families. 20.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.58 and the average family size was 2.97.In the township the population was spread out with 24.2% under the age of 18, 7.4% from 18 to 24, 28.2% from 25 to 44, 27.0% from 45 to 64, and 13.2% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 97.9 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.3 males.The median income for a household in the township was $42,139, and the median income for a family was $50,564. Males had a median income of $40,483 versus $26,971 for females. The capita income for the township was $19,385.  About 5.7% of families and 5.7% of the population were below the line, including 3.1% of those under age 18 and 10.0% of those age 65 or over.  Joseph W. DeCaire (D), currently serves as the Caledonia Charter Township Supervisor, a position he was elected to in November 2006. See also *Mining Company  Michigans first coal mine. References de Caledonia (condado de Shiawassee, Mchigan)
121725
Chisholm,_Minnesota
footnotes                 Chisholm is a city in Saint Louis County, Minnesota, States.  The population was 4,976 at the 2010 census.( U.S. Highway 169 and State Highway 73 are two of the main arterial routes in the city.A mining town on the Range, Chisholm was founded by Archibald Mark Chisholm.GeographyAccording to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which,  of it is land and  of it (7.17%) is water.Chisholm is in the center of the Mesabi Iron Range, one of the four iron ranges in the Region of Minnesota.HistoryThe site of Chisholm was first explored in 1892 by E.J. Longyear, inventor of the diamond drill, and for whom the lake in town is named. He founded the first mine in town, the Pillsbury. Later, Archibald Chisholm, who was living near Ely, migrated to Hibbing and founded the Chisholm mine there. In 1901, along with the Chisholm Improvement Community, plotted the town and had it incorporated as a village.With a railroad line to Duluth and plenty of mining work available in and near town, the population of Chisholm grew rapidly, and by 1908, the town had more than 6,000 people and 500 buildings.  On September 5, 1908, a fast-moving fire obliterated the town due to the dry conditions during the late summer and wood construction of nearly all the buildings in town.  Many people sought escape by going into the lake.  No one died in the fire.  Afterwards, building codes were enhanced, and by the next summer, more than 70 fireproof buildings had been erected.  Chisholm became a city in 1934.References* City of Chisholm  History  website  Link Education The Chisholm Independent School District draws students from the city of Chisholm and surrounding Balkan Township.  The VaughanSteffensrud Elementary School (named for the first two superintendents of the Chisholm school system) has classes for children from preschool through third grade.  Chisholm Middle School has students in grades four through six, and Chisholm High School has grades seven through twelve.Chisholm High School sports teams (nickname: the Bluestreaks) participate in Class A of the State High School League.  Competitive varsity sports include baseball, basketball, cheerleading, cross-country running, football, softball, swimming and diving, track and field, and volleyball.  Chisholm students join with students in nearby Hibbing to participate in alpine skiing, golf, gymnastics, boys hockey, girls hockey, and tennis.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 4,960 people, 2,178 households, and 1,287 families residing in the city.  The density was 1,129 people per square mile (436/km).  There were 2,375 housing units at an average density of 540/sq mi (208.9/km).  The racial makeup of the city was 97.9% White, 0.1% African American, 0.6% Native American, 0.3% Asian, 0.1% from other races, less than one percent Pacific Islander, and 1% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.7% of the population.  (Percentages may not add to exactly 100 due to rounding.) 12.8% were of Finnish, 11.9% German, 9.9% Slovene, 8.5% Italian, 8.4% Norwegian, 6.4% Irish and 5.8% French ancestry according to 2000.There were 2,178 households out of which 28% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44% were married couples living together, 11% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41% were non-families. 37% of all households were made up of individuals and 20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.2 and the average family size was 2.9.In the city the population was spread out with 22% under the age of 18, 8% from 18 to 24, 25% from 25 to 44, 23% from 45 to 64, and 22% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females there were 92 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87 males.The median income for a household in the city was $28,472, and the median income for a family was $40,431. Males had a median income of $35,972 versus $21,406 for females. The capita income for the city was $16,204.  About 6% of families and 12% of the population were below the line, including 14% of those under age 18 and 11% of those age 65 or over.Famous Chisholmites* Former major-league baseball player Dr. Archibald Moonlight Graham, played by Lancaster and Whaley in the motion picture of Dreams.* Original family home and residence of former U.S. Congressman Oberstar* Birth home of former U.S. Congressman Blatnik* Former chief executive officer of Pepsico, Enrico, younger brother of Dick Enrico (see below)* Billionaire Philip Falcone.(#707 Philip Falcone - Forbes.com)* 2nd Wind equipment founder and CEO Dick Enrico* World-class heart surgeon Charles Gornick(Minneapolis Heart Institute - Charles Gornick)* 2006 Winter Olympics mens curling bronze medalists Rojeski and Shuster* University of Minnesota athletic director (since 2002) Joel Maturi* Original family home of former Minnesota state representative and former House majority leader Tony Sertich* Chief Executive Officer of Clinic, Jacksonville, William Rupp. MD* Home of former NFL player Orlich* Most Valuable Player- Tyler James MakiIn popular culture* In the motion picture of Dreams, Ray Kinsella and Terrance Mann go to Chisholm to find Archibald Moonlight Graham.  The scenes depicting the town were actually filmed in Illinois.*Chisholm lost to Springfield during the boys basketball state tournament in 2011.See also*U.S. Highway 169*State Highway 73External links* City of Chisholm, MN  Official WebsiteReferences(Minnesota)(Minnesota)MinnesotaMinnesota(Minnesota)(Minnesota)(, )vo:Chisholm
122579
Grandin,_Missouri
footnotes                 Grandin is a city in Carter County, Missouri, States. The population was 236 at the 2000 census. The city was established in 1887 by the Missouri Lumber and Mining Company and was named after E.B. Grandin, the primary stockholder. From 1887 to 1909, the city grew to become one of the largest lumber milling centers in the country and even had a population at the time of close to 3,000 people.  Unfortunately, the Depression of the 1930s completely eliminated Grandins lumber industry altogether and is largely responsible for the massive drop in Grandins population that took place in decades to come.GeographyGrandin is located at .According to the States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all of it land.DemographicsAs of the census of 2000, there were 236 people, 90 households, and 64 families residing in the city. The density was 592.2 people per square mile (227.8/km). There were 119 housing units at an average density of 298.6 per square mile (114.9/km). The racial makeup of the city was 97.88% White, 1.27% Native American, and 0.85% from two or more races.There were 90 households out of which 30.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.4% were married couples living together, 13.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.8% were non-families. 23.3% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 2.97.In the city the population was spread out with 26.3% under the age of 18, 7.6% from 18 to 24, 31.8% from 25 to 44, 20.8% from 45 to 64, and 13.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females there were 105.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.7 males.The median income for a household in the city was $19,844, and the median income for a family was $22,500. Males had a median income of $20,417 versus $21,429 for females. The capita income for the city was $10,497. About 24.2% of families and 28.6% of the population were below the line, including 38.0% of those under the age of eighteen and 23.1% of those sixty five or over.References(External links* Historic maps of Grandin in the Sanborn Maps of Missouri Collection at the of Missouri(Missouri)(Misuri)MissouriMissouri(Missouri)(Missouri)(Missouri)
