3676434
Environment_of_Canada
The enviroment is the subject of ministries AT the fedral and provincial level in Canada, with the current highest environmental government official being the national Minister of the Environment Kent. Canadas large land mass and coastline make it very susceptible to any changes, so any contemporary changes of climate in the country are of national concern.  Of the factors caused by human intervention that can affect this environment, activities that sustain the of Canada such as oil and gas extraction, mining, forestry and fishing are influential. Several governmental programs have been created to mitigate 20th and 21st century climate change, such as the Challenge.  In late 2005 Canada hosted the Nations Climate Change Conference in Quebec.  Hundreds of organizations have been founded in Canada.See also*Environment Awards*issues in Canada*Cooperatives v. The Queen*in Canada*Development Strategy in CanadaReferencesExternal links* A National Ecological Framework For Canada*Nunavut Environmental Database
3681304
Siglo_XX
Siglo XX (Spanish for Twentieth Century) is a tin mine in Bolivia. It is located in the city of Llallagua in the province of Bustillos, Department. Along with the Catavi mine, it is part of a mining complex in the area.It was acquired in the 1910s by Iturri Patio, who was dubbed the King of Tin. It was the site of continual labor strife, and many of its workers were active in the Union Federation of Bolivian Mine Workers (FSTMB).The mine was nationalized following the Bolivian National Revolution of 1952, when the Nationalist Movement (MNR) and its allies overthrew the military junta. Siglo XX and other mines were placed under the control of a new state agency, the Minera de Bolivia (COMIBOL). The Catavi-Siglo XX complex became the largest component of COMIBOL.On June 24, 1967, government troops under the orders of General Ren Barrientos and a new military junta marched on the mine and committed the largest massacre of workers in Bolivian history.In 1987, as part of an economic restructuring deal with the IMF and World Bank, the government shut down production at Siglo XX. Currently mining operations are undertaken by members of several large cooperatives who work independently or in small groups.  Sources * Jordn Pozo, Rolando: Minera. Siglo XX: la era del estao; in: Campero Prudencio, Fernando: Bolivia en el siglo XX. La formacin de la Bolivia Contempornea, La Paz: Harvard club de Bolivia 1999, S. 219-239External links*Principales minas de estao, Bolivia (span.)*Un Da Cualquiera en Siglo XX (videdo)XX (Mine)XX (Buliwya)
3689544
Laurel_Takashima
Laurel Takashima is a fictional character from the science-fiction television series 5, portrayed by Tomita. Her only appearance was in the pilot movie The Gathering.  Character backgroundLaurel Takashima met Commander Sinclair while working at Mars Colony Security. She had been stationed at a corrupt mining station where it was common to go on the take in order to get a better job. Not succumbing to the culture of graft, but unable to receive a promotion as a result, she became disengaged from her work.  She eventually began to get into trouble with the Earth Alliance for breaking rules.  When Sinclair became her commanding officer on Mars, he agreed to seek a promotion for Takashima, if she brought her behavior in line. Sinclair asked for Takashima when he was posted to Babylon 5 in 2257, and she became Babylon 5s original first officer.(Babylon 5, The Gathering)However, following the assassination attempt on Ambassador Kosh, Takashima was recalled to Earth where she was assigned to a classified mission to the Rim by EarthForce.(Babylon 5, Soul Hunter)  She was replaced as Officer by Lieutenant Commander Ivanova in 2258.(Babylon 5, on the Firing Line)Original planTakashima was originally intended to be a main character in the Babylon 5 TV series. Because series creator Michael Straczynski knew that Tamlyn Tomita would want to leave the show eventually and pursue a film career, he planned a arc which would remove Takashima during the second season:(http://www.midwinter.com/lurk/guide/041.html#JS This was planned because we knew going in that Tamlyn Tomita had a growing film career, and we probably couldve only kept her for a couple of years in the best of circumstances.) originally, she would have been revealed as having been in on the Vorlon assassination attempt by seasons end,(Guide page: Revelations) was the one who would be harbouring the Control personality for the Corps,(http://www.midwinter.com/lurk/guide/041.html#JS Takashima would have been the one to be Control.) and under the control of this personality it would be her that shot Garibaldi in the back in the season 1 finale cliffhanger. When Tomita did not sign on for the TV series after all, the Control personality was given to Winters and the shooting of Garibaldi was done by his second-in-command.(http://www.midwinter.com/lurk/guide/022.html#JS Originally, it was Laurel Takashima who would have betrayed those around her)Takashima would have also been in an intimate relationship with the second officer, Ivanova. Ivanova was made the executive officer in place of Takashima, and the intimate relationship was again transferred to Talia Winters.Straczynski found the loss of Tomita particularly frustrating, as the Brothers executives felt she was not convincing as a military officer, a result of their own earlier request to make her performance more feminine and relatable.(http://www.midwinter.com/lurk/guide/000.html#JS They wanted her to loop her lines, soften their (her) delivery.)References
3689710
Rowland_Theater
 refnum79002186()The Rowland Theater (alternately spelled Theatre), located at 127 North Front Street, Centre County, PA, is an historic single screen movie theater, built in 1917 by Charles Hedding Rowland. It is listed on the Register of Historic Places. History The site of the Rowland Theatre building was previously occupied by the Opera House. Owned by Philipsburg business man Pierce and built sometime before 1889, this three story building was destroyed by fire, along with several other downtown buildings, on December 30, 1910. Then the Rowland family purchased the Opera House property on December 31, 1915, and immediately began making plans for the construction of a building which could house live theatrical performances as well as conventions and public meetings. The theatre is currently owned by Philipsburg Borough and leased to Rowland Theatre, Inc. a 501(c)3 non-profit. Charles Hedding Rowland Congressman Hedding Rowland, born December 20, 1860, was one of several enterprising businessmen who engaged in coal mining operations in the Philipsburg Area. He was president of both the Coal Mining Company and the Pittsburg and Susquehanna Railroad Companies during the late 19th century. He was later elected as a representative of the Republican Party to the 64th and 65th Congress. His terms of office as a U.S. Congressman began in March, 1915, and ended in March, 1919. He declined a re-nomination in 1918, serving out his remaining term before retiring. Construction Construction then was carried out under the direction of architect Millard, designer, with A. Hoyt, serving as the construction engineer. Planning began in 1915, with construction starting in 1916, and completed in mid 1917After completion of the construction of the theater, Rowland released this statement in a brochure distributed to the public on opening night in June, 1917:The people of Philipsburg have long indulged the hope of a comfortable and commodious place of amusement and entertainment. For years we have had no suitable place for public meetings, entertaining conventions, or any auditorium large enough for the varied necessities of a community as large as ours. Such a building is a public necessity. The town needs it in order to keep pace with out sister communities. Community growth would be retarded without such a public convenience.I have felt that we should have a theatre building in Philipsburg of size, safety and perfection of appointment that would anticipate the future, maintain our best past traditions, reflect a progressive spirit, while affording us a place to spend a delightful evening at home. It is proposed to stage only plays and moving pictures of class and quality. I trust the people of Philipsburg, together with those who come from surrounding towns, may enjoy the playhouse now dedicated to their use and pleasure. I wish to take this occasion to say to the theatre going public that it has been a source of some gratification to have been the one permitted to open to the general public a place for its comfort and entertainment. Restoration Efforts This section is being researched and will be available soon. Architecture The building itself is a brick and ferro-concrete structure measuring sixty-six by two-hundred-twenty-two feet in plan. The first story of the front part of the building contains the theatres entrance way, outer lobby, and two commercial stores. A suite of offices is found on the second floor and a meeting/rehearsal hall and miscellaneous rooms are on the third floor. The second and third floors are not currently used, as they do not comply with modern fire codes in providing adequate fire exits. Faade As a whole, the faade is a symmetrical composition with Classically-inspired detailing. Despite the volumetric effects of the projecting marquee, recessed theatre and shop entrances, and bracketed cornice, the image is predominantly two-dimensional. However, the use of decorative patterns in the brickwork, contrasting color and texture of materials, and architecture ornamentation contribute to a masterful composition. Horizontal emphasis is provided by simple, bold lintels about the store fronts, a course at the base of the third story windows, a projecting cornice, and caps which line the top of the parapet wall. Vertical emphasis is given by the effect of pilasters defining the three bays of the first and second stories. A rectangular concrete plaque inscribed with the word THEATRE and the marquee/theatre entrance defines a central axis. Lobby and Foyer The lobby of the Rowland theater houses the current box office and concessions, as well as the original box office, now used for minor storage. It features plate marble on the lower half of the walls, and murals depicting both Native American and local historical scenes on the upper halves. Lighting is provided by two large hanging fixtures.The foyer is large, expansive, and lavishly decorated. It features a stained glass skylight, crimson red carpet, marble plate lower walls and ornate cloth hangings on the upper walls. Two staircases, one on each side wall, lead upstairs, converging at the entrances of the main office and board room, and ending in a ramp up to the balcony. The restrooms are also located here, as well as storage for some concession supplies. Main Hall The main hall of the Rowland theater houses the majority of seating available. Approximately 1000 seats, as well as handicap-accessible areas, adorn the main floor up to the edge of the orchestra pit. The ceiling is vaulted where it meets with the steel support structure (a successful attempt to blend form and function, adding to the appealing look of the building), and once contained various ornate murals, which have since been mostly covered by white paint during restoration. Some original parts of the mural, as well as examples of restoration efforts conducted in 1930, have been left exposed.The frame of the stage is ornately decorated, and once featured similar murals to the ceiling (some examples are left exposed here as well). Still visible are original, hand-carved wood accents over the doors leading up to the stages side areas. Balcony Only 18 and older unless with an adult. Decent love cushion seats. Stage and Screen The stage in the theater is fifty feet in width, thirty-four feet deep, and has approximately 50 feet of vertical space, with eleven dressing rooms in the basement below. The front curtains are motor driven, and three additional layers of curtains run to the back wall of the stage, giving it multiple depth options for stage productions.The screen is the largest movie screen in central Pennsylvania , measuring 29 feet wide and 15 feet tall. It can be converted to handle both Flat and Scope aspect films. It is suspended from the stage ceiling, and can be raised and lowered via a pulley system located offstage to allow for quick transition between motion picture and stage events. Projection and Sound Systems The Rowland Theater uses a three-tier platter system coupled with a 35mm projector. The projector itself supports both Flat and Scope aspect films via interchangeable lenses.Sound is provided by a Dolby SR Processor. Speakers are located on stage behind the screen (center, left and right channels), in the Orchestra Pit (subwoofer), and along the sides of the theater walls (surround channels) on both the ground floor and balcony. Operation The Rowland Theater is currently owned by Philipsburg Borough and run by the non-profit Rowland Theater, Inc. Its governing body consists of a volunteer Board of Directors, and it employs approximately eight full-time employees (management. projection, and cleaning staffs). Concessions and other jobs are staffed by volunteers from the local community, and volunteer hours can be used as credit towards a variety of local programs which have community service requirements. Seating The theater can accommodate approximately 1150 people total, and approximately 950 during normal operation. This is due to the seats in the back portion of the balcony being originals, and therefore off-limits to the general public. They can be opened when needed, but this hasnt happened during modern operation. Ticket Prices Prices for movies shown at the Rowland remain among the lowest in the United States. Ticket prices are as follows:*$6 - Adult 12+*$5 - Children 4-11, Seniors 55+*Free - Children 3 and younger Stage Productions The theaters stage can be used for a variety of events, including plays, choirs, and smaller orchestras. In front of the stage is an orchestra pit which can hold approximately 30 musicians and instruments. Minimal on-stage lighting and several spotlights, located throughout the theaters main hall, are available. A house sound system, separate from the system used for motion pictures, is also available. Theater Rental The Rowland Theater is available to rent to the general public for many different types of events, including (but not limited to) private group movie screenings, weddings, live music events, auctions, cultural events, meetings, presentations and more.References External links *The Rowland Theater - Official Website*The Rowland Theater - Cinema Treasures Listing*Rowland Theater offers a touch of glamour - Article from the Centre Daily Times
3705381
Tehran_Stock_Exchange
The Tehran Stock Exchange (TSE) () is Irans largest stock exchange, which first opened in 1967.( The TSE is based in Tehran. As of July 2010, 337 companies with a market capitalization of US$72 billion were listed on TSE.(() TSE, which is a full member of the Federation of Exchanges and a founding member of the of Euro-Asian Stock Exchanges, has been one of the worlds best performing stock exchanges in the years 2002 through 2010.((BBC: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/3129995.stm)()( TSE is an emerging or frontier market.()The most important advantage that Irans market has in comparison with other regional markets is that there are 40 industries directly involved in it. Industries such as the automotive, telecommunications, agriculture, petrochemical, mining, steel iron, copper, banking and insurance, financial mediation and others trade shares at the stock market, which makes it unique in the Middle East.(The second advantage is that most of the state-owned firms are being privatized under the general policies of article 44 in the constitution. Under the circumstances, people are allowed to buy the shares of newly-privatized firms. Iran is among the few major economies that has maintained positive growth despite the 2008 global financial crisis.((Ajazeera.net: The tragicomedy of Iran sanctions Retrieved May 22, 2010)HistoryThe concept of a stock industrialization dates back to 1936 in Iran with the largest and oldest bank in Iran, Bank Melli together with Belgian experts wrote a report detailing the prospects of having an operational stock exchange in Iran. The outbreak of World War II and other political factors delayed implementation until 1967, when the Government revisited the issue and ratified the Stock Exchange Act. Consequently a small exchange, the Tehran Stock Exchange (the TSE) began its operations in 1967. Trading was initially in corporate and government bonds. The economic boom in the 1970s led to a pent-up demand for equity. Meanwhile, certain forces were changing the economic backdrop in Iran. The Government was actively involved in the grant of shares to employees for large state-owned and family-owned enterprises. Market activity was reaching a frenzy with many companies and net worth individuals vying to participate in the new-found wealth associated with the TSE.()Everything came to a standstill after the Revolution leading in a prohibition against interest-based activities and nationalization of major banks and industrial giants.  Mobilization of all resources towards the war effort during the 8-year war did not help matters. However, the Government fully embraced economic reforms and a privatization initiative in 1989 with a surge of activity in share activity of many state-owned companies through the defined targets in the first Five-Year Economic Reform where the Government together with the Parliament defined the economic prospects of the country for the coming five years. Attention to promotion of the private sector and new interest in the TSE brought life back to the market. However, lack of regulation and out-of-date legal framework led to crisis in the market leading to certain meltdowns until today. The market has experienced its share of highs and lows in the past years including topping the Federation of Exchanges list in terms of performance in 2004 to tumbling down to last place in 2007 due to political uncertainties in the region.(*rate: 1 US $10,004 IRR (2009)Industry affiliationsSince 1995, TSE has been a full member of the Federation of Exchanges (the former Fdration Internationale des Bourses de Valeurs or FIBV), and is a founding member of of Euro-Asian Stock Exchanges (FEAS).( Logo The TSE logo is based on an Achaemedian dynasty gun-metal relief found in Lorestan province, showing four men holding hands, representing cooperation, inside circles representing a globe, which then stands on two cows, symbolising prosperity.()Structure*The Securities & Exchange Council is the highest authority and is responsible for all related policies, market strategies, and supervision of the market in Iran. The Chairman of the Council will be the Minister of Economics; other members are: Minister of Trades, Governor of the Bank of Iran, Managing Director of the of Commerce, Attorney General, Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Organization, representatives of the active market associations, three financial experts requested by the Economics Minister and approved by the Council of Ministers, and one representative for each commodity exchange.()*The Securities and Exchange Organization (SEO) is responsible for administration and supervisory duties, governed by the Board of Directors. The SEOs Board of Directors are elected by the Securities and Exchange Council. SEO also actively promotes innovation in Islamic products and has formed a specific Sharia committee to assess the compatibility of new products with Islamic law. SEO is the sole regulatory entity for the regulation and development of the market in Iran.(http://en.seo.ir/Portals/80db6c92-61a1-4abe-a487-e469fa03e00c/IICM-vol1.pdf)OperationsThe TSE is open for trading five days a week from Saturday to Wednesday, excluding public holidays. Trading takes place through the Automated Trade Execution System from 9am to 12 noon, which is integrated with a clearing, settlement, depository and registry system. Settlement is T+3.( The TSE is solely an order-driven market and all transactions are executed in the manner and under the principles of open auction.(Trading platformThe Tehran Stock Exchange (TSE) has started an ambitious modernization program aimed at increasing market transparency and attracting more domestic and foreign investors. Concrete measures that have been taken in the planning and operations of the stock exchange such as the settlement system, geographical expansion, new exchange laws in order to attract local and foreign capital. The TSE has installed the new system which has been purchased from Atos Euronext Market Solutions (AEMS) in 2007.(BUSINESS WIRE: ATOSEURONEXT TO PROVIDE SYSTEMS TO TEHRAN STOCK EXCHANGE. Retrieved August 2, 2010.)The new system makes it possible to purchase and sell stocks on the same day. The system has also made it possible for 2,000 brokerage stations to work simultaneously, while the number was just about 480 in the past. The rise in electronic dealing, non-stop input and updated data on orders, transactions and indices are among other features of the new system. The new system has made it possible to link the stock market to the international bourses. The bourse can now handle 700 transactions per second and 150,000 transactions per day.()The trading system is an order driven system, which matches buying and selling orders of the investors. Investors can place their orders with TSE accredited brokers, who enter these orders into the system.( Then, the system automatically matches buy and sell orders of a particular security based on the price and quantity requirements. The mechanism for which the price of equities is determined is as follows:()*The best price (price priority)*Time of order priorityUnder the price priority rule, a selling (buying) order with the lowest (highest) price takes precedence. Under the time priority rule, an earlier order takes precedence over others at the same price. Thus, when the lowest sell and the highest buy orders match in price, the transaction is executed at the price. In short, the TSE market is a pure order-driven Market.(The trading system also generates and displays details of current and historical trading activity, including prices, volumes traded and outstanding buy and sell orders. This ensures that investors have the required information to be able to take informed investment decisions.The range of price movements is typically restricted to 3% daily either way from last closing. Restriction on Rights is 6%.( This can be changed in specific situation by the Board of the TSE in case of unusual price movements resulting in an extremely high or low ratio. selling is not permitted. There are no minimum trading lots.(( According to the Iranian Commercial Law, companies are prohibited from share repurchases.(Turquoise Partners: Iran Investment Monthly (February 2011) Retrieved April 30, 2011) TSE Services Company (TSESC), who is in charge of the site, supplies computer services. TSESC is a member of Association of National Numbering Agencies (ANNA).(Iranian Embassy in Oslo: Tehran stock exchange. Retrieved July 31, 2010.)Market segmentationBesides the Main and Secondary Market, there is a Corporate participation certificates Market (bonds). Secondary Market is an exchange facility where the listed securities of small and mid-size companies can be traded efficiently and competitively.( Any company, domestic or foreign, can list their products on the exchange for as long as they meet the listing criteria. The value of three markets of Securities and Stock Exchange, Over-the-Counter (OTC) stock exchange and commodity exchange hit $100 billion in December 2010.() In 2010, the Stock Exchange was launched to facilitate foreign investment and monetary activities in Island free trade zone.()TSE rateFile:USD-IRR exchange rate.JPG|thumb|right|dollar/rial exchange rate has remained relatively stable since 2003, when Iran adopted a managed exchange rate. Monetary policy is facilitated by a network of 50 Iranian-run forex dealers in Iran, the Middle-East and Europe.()Since 1998 importers and exporters have also been permitted to trade foreign-exchange certificates on the TSE, creating a floating value for the rial known as the TSE rate. In 2002 the official rate was abolished, and the TSE rate became the basis for the new unified foreign exchange regime.()OTC marketSince 2009, Iran has been developing an over-the-counter (OTC) market for bonds and equities (aka Farbourse). Its shareholders include the Tehran Stock ExchangeCorporation (20%), several banks, insurance companies and other financial institutions (60%), and private and institutional shareholders (20%).(Turquoise Partners: Iran Investment Monthly. Retrieved October 5, 2010.)BrokersTrading takes place through licensed private brokers registered with the Securities and Exchange Organization of Iran. Thirty-one of the 88 brokerages active in the TSE are licensed to trade the futures contracts. The leverage for futures contracts is set at 1-to-10. TSE will only deal in the derivatives through trading.(Electronic tradingStarting March 2011, investors will be able to trade in the Iranian stock market through the Internet from anywhere in the world (on a trial basis since July 2010), or get all the necessary information before traveling to Iran.() There are 87 online service providers which offer round-the-clock information and services about Iran and its stock market.(Trading feesAs of July 2010, trading fees include:*Equities and rights: 0.55% payable by the sellers and 0.5% the buyers.(Tehran Stock Exchange: FACT BOOK. Retrieved July 31, 2010.)*Participation bonds: 0.1% of transaction value payable by both the buyer and seller with a maximum of 100 million IRR.(New products and servicesPresently, TSE trades mainly in securities offered by listed companies. Equities and Corporate Bonds are being traded at TSE at the moment. The plan is to introduce other instruments in the near future. The introduction of project-based participation certificates that bear a fixed annual return during the period of the project and promise the final settlement of the profit at the date of its completion, has diversified the market.(FuturesIn 2008, commodity Futures came onto the Mercantile Exchange (IME).() In July 2010, TSE introduced six single-stock contracts based on Bank and Bank, which will expire in two, four and six months.() Thirty-one of the 88 brokerages active in the TSE are licensed to trade the futures contracts. The leverage for futures contracts is set at 1-to-10. TSE will only deal in the derivatives through trading.(OutlookEconomic sectorsFile:Tehran Stock Exchange.png|thumb|300px|right|As at 2008, about 30 firms, involved in 11 industries, hold close to 75 percent of shares in TSE. In September 2009, Company of Iran was privatized and became the largest company listed on TSE.2007: There were 324 companies listed on the TSE with a total capitalization (MC) of US$42,452 million. Close to 60% of the MC relates to listed companies from the following sectors:()*Basic Metals,*Motor Vehicles and Trailers,*Chemicals and By-Products,*Non-Metallic Minerals Products.A total of 161 companies from these sectors are listed on the TSE, which translates to 49.7% of total companies listed. Largest stocks include:*Steel Co. with MC of US$3,218 million, which translates to 7.6% of MC,*National Iranian Copper Industries Company (Persian: Sanaye Mese Iran) at 6.8% of MC,*Saipa Co. at 5.3% of MC.2008: other companies in the top spots included:()*Gol-Gohar Iron Ore Company ($2.1 billion MC),*Mining and Industrial Company ($2 billion),*Kharg Petrochemical Company (over $1 billion),*Ghadir petrochemical companies (over $1 billion),*Khuzestan Steel Company (over $1 billion),*Power Plant Projects Management Company (MAPNA) (over $1 billion),*Retirement Investment Firm (over $1 billion),*Iran Khodro Industrial Group (over $1 billion),*Metal and Mine Investment Companies (over $1 billion).This indicates that the market in Tehran is heavily concentrated on four economic sectors with companies that make up nearly half of the total listed companies on the exchange. While 163 companies listed are spread out amongst 26 sectors, with the Food and Beverages Sector alone accounts to 32 companies at a market capitalization of US$897.5 million. Studies show that in 2008 about 30 firms, involved in 11 industries, hold close to 75% of shares in Tehran Stock Exchange.()2009: A comparison of the top 100 Iranian companies and the 500 in 2009 indicated that the gross profit margins of the top 100 Iranian companies were almost double those of the Fortune 500. For Fortune 500 companies, the average profit margin was 6.9% and for the Iranian companies, it was 13%.( The sector with the highest margin among the top 100 Iranian companies in 2009 is mining, with a margin of 58%. The mining companies in the Fortune 500 had a gross profit margin of 11%. After mining, other industries with highest margins are base metals, and telecommunications.(2011: The best performing industries in 2011, in terms of total sales, were the banking and  automotive sectors. The worst performers were home appliances and electronics. In terms of profit margin, mining, telecommunications, and oil and gas exploration & production were the best performing industries. Sales totals of the top 100 Iranian companies on the list ranged from $12.8 billion or the top ranking company, Khodro, to $318 million for the 100th company.(Turquoise Partners: Iran Investment Monthly (March 2011) Retrieved April 30, 2011)Market participantsThe of Iran directly holds 35 percent of the TSE, while securing another 40 percent through pension funds and investment companies such as the Social Security Investment Company, one of the largest institutional investors on the TSE. Bonyads also play a leading role in TSE trading.( In 2005 fewer than 5 percent of Iranians owned stock.()The Government is promoting the shareholding culture in Iran. By March 2010, 3.219 million shareholders had registered in the TSE, with firms having 562,375 shareholders, which makes it the favorite industry in the stock market.()Mutual fundsAs of 2009, 21 funds managed by permitted brokerage firms and investment banks are investing in the TSE according to the investment funds regulation. Mutual funds are open ended and their operation permission is issued by the Iran Securities and Exchange Organization (SEO).( Since then, 41 funds have been established, four of which are income funds and the remainder of which are equity funds. As of August 2010, total under management within the Iranian fund management industry amount to approximately $230 million with great potential for development.(Indices TSE All-Share Price Index (TEPIX) TSE Dividend & Price return Index (TEDPIX) TSE All-Share FF adjusted (TEFIX) TSE Cash Dividend Index (TEDIX) TSE-50 Each industry (sector) Index Industrial Index Financial Index Each Company Index (based on Price & Volume)In 1990, the All-Shares Price Index (TEPIX) was introduced to the market as the main indicator of share price movements.TEPIX is a weighted market value of all share prices appearing on the TSE Board and is measured every two minutes. In addition to the TEPIX, daily price indices of shares of each company, each sector, and the Top Fifty most active companies (TSE-50) are computed.PerformanceFile:Tedpix.jpg|thumb|right|350px|As of December 2010, TSE had a market capitalization of $84 billion.(() TEDPIX, TSEs Price and Dividend Index, became the worlds second-best performing index in 2010.(20002004: The performance of the TSE has had no correlation with major exchanges or emerging stock markets over the past few years and not even with the price.() While the overall indices of the worlds five major exchanges  York, London, Paris, Frankfurt and Tokyo plunged by 40 to 70% between March 2001 and April 2003, the TSE index (Tepix) bucked the trend by going up nearly 80%.(The Tehran Stock Exchange: A Maverick Performer?, Middle East Economic Survey, May 23, 2005)20052006: In December, 2005, 419 companies with a market capitalization of IRR 32,741.7 million were listed in TSE. The TSE has had an exceptional performance over the past 5 years. In general, the stock market in 2005/06 shed value as it is manifested by the decline of its major stock price indices. The TSE price index (TSPIX) at the end of 2005/06, declined by 21.9%, while the Financial Sector Index, and the Industrial Index, declined by, 38.8%, 19.4%  respectively, and the Dividend Index gained 11.8%, mostly due to a reported 100 billion USD flight from the country because of the international dispute surrounding the nuclear programme.(2007: The market bottomed in June 2007 mainly because of the renewed privatization drive in the economy.()()()2008: The TSE was not directly affected by the international financial turmoil in 2008, but following the global reduction in prices of copper and steel, the bourse index dropped by 12.5 percent, as most of the companies listed on the exchange are producers of such commodities.(() TSE experienced an 11% growth at the end of 2008 and ranked second in the world in terms of increase in the volume of trade after Luxembourgs Bourse.()2009: The TSE sank about 40% in value between August 2008 and March 2009, influenced by falling prices and declining markets in other parts of the world. As of August 1, 2009 it has recovered by more than 10%.( During Iranian year 2009/10, the value of capital market was around $20 billion. Some 3 million trade exchanges were made, pushing up the index to 12,500 units from the previous 8,000 units.(2010: In the first month of Iranian 2010 (March 20  April 21, 2010), the index hit the 14,000 unit mark, up from the previous 12,500, showing 12 percent growth. The value of one months trading transactions exceeded $1 billion against the previous years corresponding period of $95 million.( Tehran Stock Exchange bourse index from June 2009 to 2010 grew 55 percent and the value of TSEs total capitalization went up about 33 percent, to over $71 billion.()On August 2, 2010, the TSE main index (TEPIX) reached a record level of 16,056 points, despite US-sponsored against Iran.( Thus, TEDPIX became the worlds second-best performing index.( Factors such as the global spike in oil and metal prices, government support for industries and oil sectors as well as the growth of stock market liquidity flow contributed to the boom.() Experts commented that the growth was also partly due to a government decision to sell off 20 percent of its equity in two major automakers. Given the relative low market valuation of TSE stocks in 2010, the upward trend was expected to continue over the long run, rather than being a bubble.(PressTV: Tehran stocks hit all-time record. Retrieved August 2, 2010.) TEPIX reached a new record on September 18, 2010, when it hit 18,658, up from 11,295 at the start of the year.(PressTV: Tehran Stock Exchange booming. Retrieved October 5, 2010.) As of December 2010, the TSE index rose about 64 percent since the start of 2010.() The Tehran Stock Exchange has been ranked as the best bourse index in Europe, Africa and Middle East in 2010 in terms of performance of the main index.( 2011: On February 1, 2011, TEPIX and total market value reached an all-time high of 21,349 and USD 100 billion respectively.(PressTV: TSE ranked as best bourse index Retrieved February 1, 2011)(Mehr News Agency: Tehran Stock Exchanges Index Hits Record High Retrieved January 30, 2011) An alleged $200 million investments by Iranian expats also contributed to this increase.(Mehr News Agency: Expats invest $200m in Tehran Bourse Retrieved January 30, 2011)On April 9, 2011, TSEs main index (TEPIX) hit a new all-time record high at 26,222 over a boost from the stocks of metal and shipping industries.(TaxesAs of July 2010, taxes on TSE transactions are as follows:*dividend: none (22.5% at source from Company).(*Share transfers: the Tax Amendment has changed the regulations regarding calculation of tax on transfer of shares and their rights in Iranian corporate entities.**In the case of shares listed on the Tehran Stock Exchange (TSE) the tax on transfer of such shares and other rights is 0.5 per cent of the sales price.(**In the case of transfer of the shares and their rights to other corporate entities (i.e. those not listed on the TSE) a flat rate of four per cent of value of the shares and rights transferred applies. No other taxes will be charged. The Amendment has removed the requirement to value the shares in this category.(Exemptions*gain: no tax.(*income: no tax.(*Participation papers: Profit and awards accrued are tax exempt.(*Listed companies: 10% tax exemption, companies holding 20% float shares are provided 20% tax exemption.(*Foreign investors: Foreign investors in TSE are tax-exempt.(Growth potentialFile:IRAN GDP.jpg|right|thumb|Irans nominal GDP & projections by the Bank and Economist (1999-2015 est.)According to experts, the of Iran has many investment opportunities, particularly on its stock exchange.() The Bank of Iran indicate that 70 percent of the Iranians own homes with huge amounts of idle money entering the market.() However, if the stock market grows stronger, it will undoubtedly attract idle capital.() In terms of investment, the domestic rival markets of the bourse are the Iranian real estate market, gold and car. According to Sachs, Iran is forecast to reach the highest economic growth between 2015 and 2025 and join the worlds largest economies (worlds 12th economy by 2025).(PressTV:Iran to notch up highest growth in 2015 Retrieved April 2011.)Market valuationIn 2007, the market, with a capitalization of $37 billion was trading at a fraction of the earnings multiples enjoyed by Irans neighbours, while average earnings continued to grow at about 25 per cent a year.(Gulfnews.com: Bank Melli Iran will launch fund to invest in bourse. Retrieved July 31, 2010.)  As of 2010, the price-to-earnings rate in Irans market stands at around six while it is 15 in regional markets.( With the removal of obstacles to foreign investment Iran could potentially have a 2,0003,000 billion US dollar stock exchange market.() Due to the price gains the average yield has fallen from 16 per cent in 2009 to 13 per cent in 2010.()PrivatizationIn recent years, the role of the private sector has been further on the increase. Furthermore, an amendment of the article 44 of the Constitution in 2004 has allowed 80% of state assets to be privatized, 40% of which will be conducted through the Justice Shares scheme and the rest through the Bourse Organization. The government will keep the title of the remaining 20%.(Justice Shares Payment Soon. Retrieved December 25, 2008. )()Under the privatization plan, 47 oil and gas companies (including PetroIran and Drilling Company) worth an estimated $90 billion are to be privatized on the Tehran Stock Exchange by 2014.()Foreign investors can bid in Iranian privatization tenders, but need permission from the Economy Ministry on a case-by-case basis.() The government has reduced the bureaucratic channels and issues investment permits for foreign nationals in less than seven days.(Iran has announced it will begin to allow foreign firms to purchase Iranian state-run companies, with the possibility of obtaining full ownership.()Iranian expatriatesThere are differing estimates of the expatriates total capital (1.3 trillion dollars()), but what is clear is that it is so huge that it will be enough to buy shares of all state companies. In Dubai alone, Iranian expatriates are estimated to have invested up to $200 billion.() If 10 percent of this capital arrives, things will change drastically in Iran.() In 2000, the Iran Press Service reported that Iranian expatriates had invested between $200 and $400 billion in the States, Europe, and China, but almost nothing in Iran.(Migration Policy Institute  Iran: A Vast Diaspora Abroad and Millions of Refugees at Home. Retrieved December 28, 2010.) FIPPA provisions apply to all foreign investors, and many Iranian expatriates based in the US continue to make substantial investments in Iran.()Foreign portfolio investmentFile:TEPIXvsDJIA.png|thumb|300px|left|The performance of the TSE has had no correlation with major exchanges or emerging stock markets over the past few years and not even with the price.(So far, the Tedpix index has been driven by domestic investors, including wealthy Iranians, public sector pension funds and the investment arms of state-owned banks. For the index to prosper in the long run, more foreign investors need to make significant share purchases.() As at 2009, portfolio investment accounts for only about 2 percent of the stock market in Iran.()(The new by-law on foreign portfolio investment was approved by the government in June 2005, but ratified by the Council of Ministers in April, 2010. Under this new bylaw, foreign investors can participate in the TSE for the first time. Initially, however, some limitations had been imposed on foreign investors:* Foreign investors may own a maximum of 10 percent of each listed company.* Foreign investors may not withdraw their main capital and capital gain for the first three years of their investment. Repatriation is possible once a year under current regulations.With the new law, Iran has increased the ceiling on foreign participation to 20% and foreign investors can now invest in the capital market, trade shares (including OTC) and:# for small-scale (foreign) investors, take out their money at any time;()()# for large-scale investors which possess 10 percent of the agencys value or 10 percent of the management position, can take their capital out of the country after two years upon receiving permission from the government.()Exchange currenciesSince April 2010, foreign investors have been able to open foreign-currency accounts at Iranian banks and exchange their currencies to rials and vice-versa. Foreigners who want to trade in Iran must get a license, which the exchange says will take seven days on its website.(Non-commercial risksThe Bank of Iran is also in charge of providing the investors with the necessary foreign exchange, which is also transferrable.( Moreover, under the law, foreign investors are protected and insured against possible losses and damages caused by future political turmoil or regional conflicts.Dual listingIran is to target foreign investment in its energy sector by creating an umbrella group of nearly 50 state-run firms and listing its shares on four international stock exchanges.()Offshore fundsThe Turquoise Iran Equity Investments from the London-based investment boutique Turquoise Partners is one of the few opportunities for foreign investors to participate on the Tehran Stock Exchange.(Financial Times: Tehran exchange extends advance. Retrieved November 8, 2010.) Turquoise Partners publishes one of the few English newsletters that covers developments of the Tehran Stock Exchange and the economy called Iran Investment Monthly. As of July 2010, Turquoise Partners says it controls around 90% of the total value of foreign investments on the Tehran Stock Exchange.(Turquoise Partners: Iran Investment Monthly Retrieved May 2, 2011) Turquoise is a private company with offices in Tehran and London.(Turquoise Partners website Retrieved January 8, 2011)U.S. sanctionspersons need a license from the U.S. Treasury Departments Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) in order to invest in the TSE.(Payvand.com: How U.S. Laws Can Affect Your Personal Affairs in Iran Retrieved January 4, 2010)See also*eleven*International Rankings of Iran in Economy*of Iran*industry in Iran*in Iran*of Iranian companies*of banks in Iran*Oil Bourse*labor law*of Mideast stock exchangesReferencesExternal links* Tehran Stock Exchange (TSE)**TSE Indexes**TSE 2009-Factbook**Tehran Stock Exchange Services Company (TSESC)*Iran Securities and Exchange Organization (SEO)  Offers Quarterly Bulletin of Iran Islamic Capital Market*Federation of Euro-Asian Stock Exchanges  TSE statistics/regulations/operations/international comparisons/calendar and latest news*Irans Capital Markets  Comprehensive 2003-Study* Turquoise Partners  Monthly report on the Tehran Stock Exchange and Irans economy*List of top 100 Iranian companies  2008 List by Iran Industrial Management Company*Iran Daily: Iranian Bourse Prospects for Foreign Investment*Iran CSD Company  Clearing and setllement of trading, central registry*Association of National Numbering Agency (ANNA)*World Federation of Exchanges (WFE);Videos* Irans Stock Market  Part I Part II  PressTV*2010 Hike in Irans Bourse  PressTV  (2010)*Investing in Iran  Part I Part II Part III Part IV Part V VI  CNBC (December 2010)*Irans flourishing economy - PressTV (2011)*Irans Bourse: Hallmark of Iranian economy - PressTV (2011)de Tehern  de ThranSaham Teheran Borsas
3719001
Eldorado_nuclear
#REDIRECT Mining and Refining
3723271
Maritime_history_of_California
Maritime history of California is a term used to describe significant ships and uses of the Ocean near the California coast. This Maritime history includes the historical use of water craft such as: dugouts, canoes, ships, steamships, fisheries, shipbuilding, Gold Rush shipping, ports, shipwrecks, Naval ships and installations and Lighthouses.  The Maritime history of California can be divided into several periods: the Native American period; European exploration period from 1542 to 1769; the Spanish colonial period, 1769 to 1821; the Mexican period, 1821 to 1847; and United States statehood period, which continues to the present day.Native California maritime peoplesDugout Canoesthumb|300px|right|Dugout CanoeIn the northwest coast of California near the Redwood forests several Indian tribes developed large dugout canoes they used for fishing, trade and warfare. These canoes were constructed by taking a large tree and shaping it with hand tools and fire to a boats configuration. A redwood log  long and  diameter weighs about . This large weight meant that the logs were selected that required a minimum of movementusually driftwood or dead fall trees that had been blown over by the wind. Sometimes logs were cut to length and rolled into water where they could be floated to a selected work area.  The logs were usually cut to length by fire and stone age hand tools and the interior of the canoe was typically burned out with small fires. The basic procedure was to start a small fire on the tree where it needed shaping, then extinguish it after a short burn. This would leave one or more centimeters of charred wood where the fire was built that would be easier to remove. By successively using small fires to char the areas that needed to be worked the logs could be shaped by the crude scrapers and rock, shellfish and horn  based tools available. A finished  long dugout canoe with a nominal  thickness still weighed over . Most larger dugouts weighed too much to move easily and were usually just pulled up on a beach far enough to get them above high tide. Constructing these types of dugout canoes took considerable time and skill with stone age tools and fire.Tule boats (canoes)thumb|left|250px|Tule reeds growing wild near waterTule (acutus also called bulrushes) have a thin (~1 cm or 0.5 inch) diameter, rounded green stems that grows to 1 to 3 metres (310 ft) tall. They grow well in marshes, wetlands or at the edges of bodies of water. The tule stem has a pithy interior filled with spongy tissue packed with air cellsthis makes it float well on water as well as a good insulator.  Native Americans used tule for making and thatching huts,(Making tule huts http://www.primitiveways.com/pt-tule_shelter.html accessed 12 May2011) baskets, mats,(Tule mats http://outsideeducators.com/Twined_tule_mat.html accessed 12 MAY 2011) boats, decoys, hats, clothing and shoes. Tule was typically cut using deer scapula saws that had rough saw like edges cut into them.(Tule saws http://www.primitiveways.com/pt-tule_shelter.html accessed 12 May 2011) Tule has to be handled with care when green to avoid breaking the stem and gains strength when it is partially dried.Several tribes in and around the Francisco Bay area and in northern California made and used tule canoes (also called  balsas).(Tule canoe pictures can easily be obtained by using Google Images and typing in Tule canoe and searching. This will bring up multiple pictures of the different types of tule boats and associated locations where they are discussed.)  Miwok, Miwok, Ohlone  (Costanoan), Pomos, Klamath, Modoc and several other California Indian tribes used the tule plant to make tule canoes.(Tule canoe construction http://www.primitiveways.com/Tule_boat2.html accessed 12 May 2011)  Tule canoes were used in ocean lagoons from Bay and Reyes National Seashore south to perhaps Bay. Tulereed boats were used in lakes, bays and slow-moving rivers in much of Northern California. They were used by the Pomos living in the de Santa Rosa and Clear Lake, Lake and other areas. They were common in the Francisco Bay and on the extensive  San Joaquin River Delta and its tributary rivers. These tule canoes were used for transportation to and from their favorite spots for hunting or harvesting salmon, acorns, seeds,  berries, shellfish or oysters and other fish or foods. Extensive beds and shoals of oysters (lurida) and other crayfish then lay near the shores of Francisco Bay and Bay and were a food source used for centuries. Tule canoes were also used for gathering more tule reeds and for hunting ducks or geese which were then often present in the wetlands, etc. in the millions. Collecting aquatic food plants and duck and goose eggs was also common. Ducks and geese were often hunted with arrows or nets. Tule canoes were used in fishing with Nets, spears or bone fishhooks for several native fish species present in or migrating through the rivers, ocean and bays.Tule boats can be quickly built from dried tule, by experienced canoe builders, in less than one day.(Tule Boat Project Pictures http://www.primitiveways.com/Tule_boat1.html Accessed 9 May 2011) Tule boats have a limited useful life before they rot and/or come aparttypically only lasting a few weeks. To make a tule boat, green tule (acutus or  bulrush ) was cut and then spread out in the sun to dry for several days. Tule canoes were constructed of cut stalks of tule plants bundled together around a willow core for extra strength into three to six tied together tapered cigar-shaped bundle of tules. The bundles could be pre-bent to form a raised prow and stern. The length of each bundle depends on the size of the boat that were then typically about  to . The bundle that formed the bottom of the canoe on which the boatman or boatmen sat, knelt or stood was much larger than the others.  To make the sides of the tule canoe two to six tapered bundles were tied to the bottom bundle with grape vines or other native material with extensive lacing at the at the stern and prow to bend all the tule bundles into a tapered and raised bow and stern. Tule canoes typically accommodated one to four people.The boatman typically sits, kneels or stands in the boat and either paddles it with a double bladed paddle or with his arms when lying prone. If the boat was not woven tightly enough, then the boatman would find himself sitting, standing or kneeling in several inches of water. The tule canoes were often used for transportation to oyster mollusk and other shellfish beds that could be harvested at tide. The Shellmound composed mostly of the inedible shells of shellfish, presumably mostly harvested utilizing tule boats, is an example of the over 400 shell mounds known in the Francisco Bay area. These multiple mounds, often built up over centuries, showed a stable source of easily obtained food utilized for 100s of years.(Shell mounds in the San Francisco Bay 1909 http://www.stanford.edu/group/spatialhistory/cgi-bin/site/viz.php?id23& Accessed 9 May 2011)To see pictures of tule canoes use the image option of Google, Bing, etc. and type in Tule canoe and search--several images are usually found that may be clicked on for more information. Local conservation groups often have courses in building tule canoes.(Hand build tule canoe http://coastliveoak.com/tule_boat/tule_boat.html accessed 10 Jul2011)Sewn Plank (Tomol) canoesAn ancient maritime culture dating back some 8,000 years, perhaps earlier, has been documented by recent dating of middens on Clemente Island, some 60 miles offshore California. Native California peoples lived in large settled villages along the Pacific coastline and on the Islands of California for thousands of years before European contact.thumb|300px|right|The California Channel IslandsIn some areas, such as along the Barbara Channel separating the Islands of California from the California coast the Chumash and  people in these villages developed highly sophisticated canoes. These canoes were used in fishing and in widespread trade between different villages on and off the Islands of California. Boat construction reached its highest development in California among the Chumash and people. Their sewn plank canoes, called a tomol, impressed early explorers of the California coast for its versatility, seaworthiness and size.(Tomol Canoe construction http://www.parks.ca.gov/?page_id24433 Accessed 9 May 2011)(Chumash and Tongva Tomol (Plank) Canoes http://www.boemre.gov/omm/pacific/kids/watercraft.htm Accessed 9 May 2011)The canoes were typically made out of planks split from redwood (Sequoioideae) or pine driftwood washed up on the shore. This driftwood was usually chosen because it was available and usually knot free and easy to work with. Some of these driftwood logs were selected, cut to length, split, shaped and then their split out planks sewn together to form a canoe. The side planks and canoe bottom were split out of straight knot free logs utilizing whalebone and antler Wedges driven by rock mallets. The planks were then shaped, trimmed and leveled  using flint and seashell tools and shark hide sandpaper. Where planks needed to be connected holes were bored in the planks using wood drills tipped with chert or bone. These drilled planks were then connected by sewing split and shaped knot free planks together on their ends to get the necessary length. They were typically fastened together with red milkweed (tok) fiber cords. After the planks had been shaped and sewn together for length they were carefully shaped, bent and mounted six to eight planks vertically to form the canoes sides around a large split bottom plank that formed the bottom of the canoe. Over 20 pieces of shaped wood are used to make a typical tomol. Once the planks were bent, fitted and lashed together the heart of dry tule rush was forced into the cracks between the planks on the outside of the canoe hull to act as caulking. All seams between planks, plank ends and holes for cords or thongs were then caulked with yop, a mixture of hard tar and pine pitch melted and then boiled. In many respects their boat construction technique mirrored that utilized for making small wooden boats around the world. The lack of metal tools and fasteners forced them to use stone age tools and materials.These canoes were built to carry from 3 to 10 people, one of which was usually assigned to bail, and the rest propelled the canoe by using rough oars. The typical tomol was  to  long with a beam of  to .  Sea voyages of over a  have been recorded for these craft. They fished the sea with nets, harpoons, spears and bone fishhooks. One of their common net catches were sardines and larger sardines called pilchardsthen common in large schools off the California coast. The Chumash had settlements on the main California coast and on the northern California Channel Islands. The Tongva (Gabrielino-Tongva Tribe) had several small settlements on the southern Channel Islands as well as villages on the main California southwest coast.Chumash and Tongva trading expeditions between the mainland and the Channel Islands were common. Most were to obtain steatite for soapstone bowls and effigy figurines. The remains of this prehistoric seafaring is being investigated by underwater archaeologists. At least 25 individual sites have been reported between California Beach and Conception.Early European explorersright|thumb|350px|The  island of California, from a map circa 1650. Restored. Ulloas discoverys of 1539 were apparently still secret.In 1539, de Ulloa under commission from the of New Spain and Spain (Mexico) conqueror, Corts, explored the of California to the River--establishing California as a peninsula. Ulloa then went  south down the Peninsula in the of California and rounding the tip of the peninsula turned north and explored the west coast of the California peninsula--perhaps to the 28th Parallel (near the Natividad).(The Discovery & Earliest Explorations of Baja California http://www.sandiegohistory.org/journal/65january/discovery.htm Accessed 11 May 2011) Ulloas ships battered by adverse winds and his men wracked by scurvy, returned to Spain (Mexico) without exploring further.File:Cabrillo National Monument (Loki30).jpg|thumb|left|180px|The National Monument in San  Diego, CaliforniaThe first European expedition to explore the upper California coast was led by the Portuguese/Spanish explorer and conquistador Rodrigues Cabrilho (~1499-1543).  Cabrillo shipped for Havana as a young man and joined forces with Corts in Spain (Mexico) in about 1820 as a conquistador crossbow man. In the conquest of the Aztec capital of Tenochitlan (Mexico City) in 1521 Cortez directed Cabrillo to build thirteen  boats to fight on the lake then in the center of Tenochitlan. Rapidly advancing under Cortezs direction he participated in the conquest of Salvador and Guatemala and was rewarded by being granted an extensive Encomienda (a feudal grant of land including the occupants on it) controlling vast land and Native American resources in Guatemala. His success in guiding the Native Americans on his Encomienda in  mining gold in Guatemala, made him one of the richest of the conquistadors in Mexico and Guatemala.(Kelsey, Harry; 1986; Joo Rodrigues Cabrillo; The Huntington Library, San Diego California) Sponsored by de Alvarado, the Guatemala governor,  Cabrillos directed the building of several small ships in Guatemala. After Alvarados death in 1541 the new Viceroy of New Spain, de Mendoza took over control of the shipyards and directed Cabrillo to build three ships and lead an expedition further up the Pacific Coast in search of more rich Native American civilizations like the Aztec and Incas. They were also to see if there was a shorter way to Chinathe mythical Strait of Anin (or Passage) connecting the Pacific Ocean with the Ocean.To build the ships the anchors, sails, building tools and metal fittings were imported from Spain and then ported by mule and Native American porters across Mexico and then south to Guatemala. Cabrillo, a former shipbuilder, with his Spanish assistants and Native American workers had the necessary lumber sawed out and assembled to make the first ships built on the Americas Pacific coastin Guatemala. The ships finished lumber and timbers was sawed out of trees with new steel saws manned by Native American laborers under the direction of a few Spanish shipbuilders. The ships built for exploring the Pacific were small open caravels and small bergantina (small open sailboat) built and manned by a mixture of Native Americans and Spanish sailors and conquistadors.The last ships built under Cabillos direction were the California exploration fleet:caravels, San Salvador (about  long) and the smaller Victoria, and a bergantina (small sail boat or launch), San Miguel. Cabrillo captained the San Salvador and Ferrelo the Victoria. These vessels were the first European ships to visit the future state of California.(Cabrillos life http://sanpasqual.schoolwires.com/14671091285523370/lib/14671091285523370/Cabrillo.pdf Accessed 10 May 2011)thumb|right|180px|Point Reyes CaliforniaAfter the California exploration ships were built, Cabrillo and his crews of about 200 men with supplies for about two years carefully made their way north from Navidad, Mexico up the Pacific coast starting on 17 June 1542. The combination of the south flowing Current and often opposing winds made progress north up the coast agonizingly slow. The small, open boats with only partially trained crews caused the crews to suffer miserably in the storms they encountered on their way. After landing several times on the California coast for water, wood and whatever supplies they could scrounge they finally, after traveling one hundred and three days, entered Diego Bay on 28 September 1542. They continued north up the California coast encountering many Indian villages using Native American tomols (ocean going stitched canoes). The continued north up the coast possibly as far as Reyes California.(Bankston, John; Juan Rodgriquesz Cabrillo; Mitchell Lane Publishers; 2004; ISBN 1-58415-199-4)On 23 November 1542, the little fleet limped back down the coast to San Salvador (identified as todays Catalina Island, California or Santa Rosa Island) to overwinter and make repairs. There, around Eve 1542, Cabrillo stepped out of his boat and splintered his shin when he stumbled on a jagged rock. The injury developed gangrene and he died on 3 January 1543 and was buried in an unknown location. His second-in-command, Ferrelo, brought the remainder of the party back to de Navidad, Mexico where they arrived 14 April 1543. They had found no wealth, no advanced Indian civilization, no agriculture and no Northwest passage. As a result California was of little further interest to the Spanish who would basically ignore it for over 220 years.thumb|right|180px|Spanish GalleonImage:North Pacific Subtropical Convergence Zone.jpg|thumb|right|180px|Trade winds used by the Galleon to get to and from Guam and the Philippines--the Pacific GyreIn 1565 the Spanish developed a Galleon trade route (also called nao de la China) where they took silver  minted in the Potosi area of Peru or in Mexico and traded it for silk, porcelain, spices  and other goods from China and other Asian areas including the Spice Islands. There was a great demand for silver in China. They also traded for gold objects which could be gotten in China in this time period at a silver:gold exchange rate of about 5:1 whereas the rate in Europe was about 16:1. The Spanish centered their trade in the Philippines at first around Cebu, which they had recently conquered, and later in Manila after they conquered it. The trade between the Philippines and Mexico involved using an annual round trip  passage of one or more galleon(s). These galleons left Acapulco Mexico and sailed to the Philippines in about 90 days following whats called now the north equatorial current and winds.The  higher-latitude Westerlies trade winds and current from east to west at about 30-40 degrees latitude, was not known as a way across the Pacific ocean  until de Urdanetas voyage in the 40 ton San Lucas in 1565.() Returning to Mexico from the Philippines the Manila Galleons went north to about 40 degrees Latitude and then turning East they could use the Westerlies trade winds and currents to go east. These galleons, after crossing most of the Ocean, would arrive off the California coast from four to seven months later somewhere near Mendocino (about  north of San Francisco) at about 40 degrees N. latitude. They then could turn right and sail south down the California coast utilizing the available winds and the south flowing (about ~1 mi/hr (1.6 km/h)) Current. The maps and charts were poor and the California coast was often shrouded in fog, so most journeys were well off shore to avoid the Farallon and Channel Islands. After sailing about  south and passing the Peninsula tip and crossing the of California they followed the coast to Acapulco Mexico. Acapulco was chosen as a home port because of its excellent harbor facilities and its easy access to the city of Vera Cruz Mexico on the Caribbean.These galleons were some the largest the Spanish built in the 16th and 17th centuries. Because of the limited number of ships and the highly profitable  cargo they increased ship size up to 1,700 to 2,000 tons and from seven hundred to over one thousand people would take passage back to Acapulco on these vessels. The Manila Galleon trade (See: treasure fleet) was one of the most persistent, perilous, and profitable commercial enterprises in European colonial history. This highly profitable trade (profits could reach 200-300%) with an almost annual trip by one to two ships down the California coast was continued for over 200 years. The number of ships was limited by the Crown which got 20% of all profits. Because of the high profit and royal taxes smuggling was rampant on these ships. Because of the harsh trip and high profits most officers and crews only made one trip before finding something else to do. The ships were mostly built in the Philippines using Filipino laborers to saw out the timber, weave the sails, etc. with Chinese craftsman and blacksmiths doing the ship assembly under the direction of Spanish shipbuilders.(Shurtz, William Little; The Manila Galleon; E.P. Dutton and Co., New York 1939; p. 193-225)thumb|180px|Sir Francis Drake, circa 1581The English explorer and privateer Drake sailed along the coast of California in 1579 after capturing two Spanish treasure ships in the Pacific. It is believed that he landed somewhere on the California coast. There his only surviving ship, the Hind, set up friendly relations with the local Indians and underwent extensive repairs and cleaning of his hull. Needed supplies of food, water and wood were accumulated by trade and foraging for a trip across the Pacific. Leaving California he followed Magellan on the second recorded circumnavigation of the world and the first English circumnavigation of the world, being gone from 1577 to 1580. He returned with several tons of silver and gold. Its believed Drake put ashore somewhere north of San Francisco. The exact location of Drakes landing is still undetermined, but a prominent bay on the California coast, Bay, bears his name. He claimed the land for England, calling it Albion. The term Nova Albion was often used on many European maps to designate territory north of the Spanish Pacific coast settlements. Spanish maps, explorations etc., of this and later eras were generally not published, being regarded as state secrets by the Spanish monarchy. As was typical in this era, there were conflicting claims to the same territory, and the Indians who lived there were never consulted.After Cavendish raided the  Galleon Santa Ana off the tip of California in 1587 an attempt was made to explore the coast for a possible town site in California for replenishing and protecting the galleons. These Manila Galleon explorations met with disaster when the galleon San Agustin got too close to the Reyes, California coast in a storm in 1595 and was wrecked. Subsequently, the Spanish crown decided that no further exploration or colonization attempts in California would be made with Manila Galleons. A years worth of profit from the Philippines could not be risked. One of the greatest bays on the west coastFrancisco Bayescaped discovery for centuries till it was finally discovered by land exploration on 4 November 1769.In 1602, 60 years after Cabrillo, the Spaniard Vizcano, who had been on the Galleon Santa Ana when it was captured by Cavendish off San Lucas on the Peninsula in 1587, explored Californias coastline from Diego, California as far north as Bay. He was looking for a possible town site for replenishing and protecting the annual trip of the Manila Galleon. Vizcano named Diego Bay and held the first Christian church service recorded in California on the shores of Diego Bay. He also put ashore in California and made glowing reports of the Bay area as a possible anchorage for ships with land suitable for growing cropsthe California coastal Indians had no agriculture. He also provided rudimentary charts of the coastal waters, which were used by the Spanish for nearly 200 years.Spanish California Maritime ActivitiesA potential colonial power interested in California was Russia, already established in the Ocean in  Alaska. Their Fur Trade originally focused in Alaska started making expeditions to the California for harvesting otters and seals. These furs could be traded in China for large profits. After the conclusion of the Seven Year War between Britain and France and their allies (in U. S. called the and Indian War)  (17541763) France was driven out of North America, Spain, Russia and Britain were the only colonial powers left in America.To prevent Russia or Britain from establishing settlements in California in 1769, the Spanish Visitor General, de Glvez, under directions of the Crown, proceeded to plan a five part expedition to settle California. Three ships with supplies and men were to go by sea and two expedition by land to start settling California. de Portola volunteered to command the expedition. The Catholic Church was represented by Franciscan friar Serra and his fellow friars. All five detachments of soldiers, friars and colonists were to meet at the site of Diego Bay. The first ship, the San Carlos, sailed from La Paz on January 10, 1769, and the ship San Antonio sailed on February 15. The first land party, led by Rivera y Moncada, left from the Franciscan Mission San Fernando Velicata on March 24, 1769. The third vessel, the ship San Jos, left Spain later that spring but was lost at sea with no survivors. With Rivera was Father Crespi,(Crespi, Juan, ed. By Brown, Alan; A description of distant roads: Original journals of the first expedition into California, 1769-1770; San Diego State University Press; (2001), in Spanish and English; ISBN 978-1879691643) famed diarist of the entire expedition. The expedition led by Portol, which included Father Serra, the President of the Missions, along with a combination of missionaries, settlers, and leather-jacket soldiers, including Raimundo Carrillo, left Velicata on May 15, 1769 accompanied by about 46 mules, 200 cows and 140 horsesall that could be spared by the poor Baja Missions. Fernando de Rivera was appointed to command the lead party that would scout out a land route and blaze a trail to San Diego.(Riveras explorations) Food was short, and the Indians accompanying them  were expected to forage for most of what they needed. Many Indian neophytes died along the wayeven more deserted. On the 15th of May 1769, the day after Rivera and Crespi reached Diego, California Portola and Serra set out from Velicata.  The two groups traveling from Lower California on foot had to cross about  of the very dry and rugged Peninsula. The overland part of the expedition took about 4051 days to get to San Diego. All five detachments were to meet at Diego Bay.The contingent coming by sea, encountered the south flowing Current and strong head winds and were still straggling in three months after they set sail. After their arduous journeys, most of the men aboard the ships were ill, chiefly from scurvy, and many had died. Out of a total of about 219 men who had left Baja California, little more than 100 now survived.  The Spanish settlements of Alta California were the last expansion of Spains vastly over-extended empire in North America, and they tried to do it with minimal cost and support.A few leather jacket soldiers and Franciscan friars financed by the Church and Crown would form the backbone of the proposed settlement of California. The settlements eventually included: twenty one surviving Missions--typically manned by two to three friars and five to ten soldiers; four military Presidios were builtmanned by 10 to 100 soldiers and four small settlements (Pueblos) were set up to grow food for the Presidios.July 14, 1769, an expedition was dispatched to find the port of California. Not recognizing the Bay from the description written by Vizcano  almost 200 years prior, the expedition traveled beyond it to what was called  Francisco, California area. The exploration party, led by Don de Portol arrived on November 2, 1769, at Francisco Bay.,() One of the greatest ports on the west coast of America had finally been discoveredby land.  The expedition finally returned to San Diego on Jan. 24, 1770 weak with hunger and suffering from scurvy.Without any agricultural crops or experience eating the food the Indians subsisted on (ground acorns), the shortage of food at San Diego became extremely critical during the first few months of 1770. They subsisted on some of their cattle (Texas Longhorns,(California Longhorns Vs. Texas Longhorns http://www.catl.com/compare.html accessed 10 June 2011) wild geese, fish, and other food exchanged with the Indians for clothing, but the ravages of scurvy continued for there was restricted amounts of food and no understanding of the cause or cure of scurvy then. A small quantity of corn they had planted grew wellonly to be eaten by birds. Portol sent Captain Rivera and a small detachment of about 40 men to the Baja California missions in February to obtain more cattle and a pack-train of supplies. This temporarily eased the drain on San Diegos scant provisions, but within weeks, acute hunger and increased sickness again threatened to force abandonment of the port.  Portol resolved that if no relief ship arrived by March 19, 1770 they would leave the next morning because there were not enough provisions to wait longer and the men had not come to perish from hunger. At three oclock in the afternoon on March 19, 1770, as if by a miracle, the sails of the ship San Antonio loaded with relief supplies were discernible on the horizon. The settlement of California would continue.left|thumb|250px|Monterey BayBautista de Anza led a contingent of soldiers, settlers and friars to the Francisco Bay area in 1776. There the Spanish built the San Francisco de Ass, (or Mission Dolores), the of San Francisco and Buena, California (Francisco). They came with about 200 leather jacketed soldiers, and settlers with their families and two Franciscan Friars. They brought with them about 600 horses and mules, 300 Texas Longhorn bulls and cows. These soldiers, Frairs, settlers and livestock came over the Anza Trail from Sonora Mexico four years before it was closed for over 40 years by the people (Yumas).In 1780 the Spanish established two combination missions and pueblos at the Crossing of the River: San Pedro y San Pablo de Bicuer and Puerto de Pursima Concepcin. July 1781 the Yuma (Quechan) Indians, in a dispute with the Spanish destroyed both missions and puebloskilling 103 soldiers, colonists and Franciscan Friars and capturing about 80mostly women and children. Despite four expeditions to reassert Spanish control the Crossing remained under the Quechans control for the next 40 yearsthe easiest land route to California was closed. This restriction caused most settler traffic and supplies to Alta California to come on a 30-60 day ship journey form Spains towns on the Ocean. Because there were only a few settlers and they had essentially nothing to export or trade so there were only a few ships that came to Alta California. Combined  with the Spanish restriction that prohibited non-Spanish shipping the average number of ships going to Alta California from 1770 to 1821 was 2.5 ship/year with 13 years showing no recorded ships.(Seventy-five Years in San Francisco ship records http://www.sfgenealogy.com/sf/history/hb75yap6.htm accessed 11 May 2011)On November 20, 1818 de Bouchard  raided the of Monterey in California. Bouchard, a French revolutionary who later became a citizen of Argentina, is sometimes referred to as Californias only pirate, although some Argentines prefer to use the term corsair.Since much of his crew died from scurvy, Bouchard went in search of new crew members in the Sandwich Islands (now Hawaii), and then sailed to the coast near Santa Brbara and threatened the nearby town.Bouchard and his crew left without attacking after some soldiers from Presidio de Santa Brbara confronted them, and arranged a prisoner exchange.On December 14, 1818 Bouchard attacked San Juan Capistrano and he and his crew damaged several buildings, including the Governors house, the Kings stores, and the barracks.Californio Maritime Activities 1821-1846Even before Mexico gained control of California the onerous Spanish rules against trading with foreigners began to break down as the declining Spanish fleet couldnt enforce their no trading policies. The Californios, with essentially no industries or manufacturing capabilities, were eager to trade for new commodities, glass, hinges, nails, finished goods, luxury goods and other merchandise. The Mexican government abolished the no trade with foreign ships policy and soon regular trading trips were being made. The main products of these California Ranchos were cow hides (called California greenbacks), tallow (rendered fat for making candles and soap) and longhorn cattle horns(Dana, Richard Henry; Two Years Before the Mast;May 8, 1836: Project Gutenberg online Etext) that were traded for other finished goods and merchandise. This hide-and-tallow trade was mainly carried on by Massachusetts based ships that traveled for about 200 days in ships about  to  around Horn to bring finished goods and merchandise to trade with the Californio Ranchos for their hides, tallow and horns. The cattle and horses that provided the hides, tallow and horns essentially grew wild. The Californios hides, tallow and horns provided the necessary trade articles for a mutually beneficial trade. The first United States, English and Russian trading ships began showing up in California before 1816.  The classic book Years Before the Mast by Henry Dana, Jr. written about 1832 provides a good first hand account of this trade.(Dana, Richard;  Two Years Before the Mast: A Personal Narrative of Life at Sea Republished by CreateSpace (2010)  ISBN 978-1456472825)From 1825 to 1848 the average number of ships traveling to California increased to about 25 ships per yeara large increase from the average of 2.5 ships per year from 1769 to 1824.(California ships to 1847 http://www.sfgenealogy.com/sf/history/hb75yap6.htm Accessed 6 Mar 2011)  The port of entry for trading purposes was California where custom duties (tariffs) of about 100% were applied. These high duties gave rise to much bribery and smuggling, as avoiding the tariffs made more money for the ship owners and made the goods less costly to the customers. Essentially all the cost of the California government (what little there was) was paid for by these Tariffs (custom duties). In this they were much like the United States in 1850, where about 89% of the revenue of its federal government came from import tariffs (also called Customs or Ad-valorem taxes), although at an average rate of about 20%.(U.S. federal tax rates 1850 http://usgovernmentrevenue.com/index.php?year1850#usgs302a accessed 6 Mar 2011)By 1845, the province of Alta California had a non-native population of about 1,500 Californio adult men along with about 6,500 women and children, who lived mostly in the southern half of the state around Los Angeles.(Californios http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/California,_history_to_1845 Accessed 25 July 2009) Most immigrants (nearly all of whom were adult males) lived in the northern half of California.U.S. California Naval activityShortly after the United States gained independence in 1783 trade was instituted from East Coast ports with the  West Coast to gather furs in the Fur Trade to trade with China for porcelain, silk, spices etc.. British Navy commander Vancouver sailed up the west coast past the mouth of the River  and on April 1792 and observed a change in the waters color, which implied there may be a major river emptying into the Pacific.() Later that month, Vancouver encountered the American captain Robert Gray at Harbor--later named that in his honor. Gray also reported that he had seen the possible entrance to the Columbia a few years earlier and had spent nine days trying but failing to enter the river over its extensive sand bars and turbulent waves; but bad weather forced him to give up.( URL is to the Book Search version.)  Gray returned to the river mouth a second time in May 1792. This time he ordered a small sailboat launched to attempt to find a safe passage across the bars and turbulent waves by sounding (measuring the depth with a weight attached to a line of known length) the water depth to find a  channel deep enough for his ship. Finally in the evening of May 11, 1792, Grays men found a safe channel and  he and his crew sailed  their ship Columbia into the estuary of what he named the River after his ship.()Once across the sand bars and turbulent water at the entrance to the river (later called the Bar) they sailed up the River several miles while exploring the river. Grays discovery was one of the claims the United States had for possession of the Territory. The and Clark Expedition (18041806) was the first overland expedition to the Pacific Coast and reinforced the United States claim for possession.Beginning about 1790 United States ships often sailed along the West Coast to gather furs for trading with China. They traded steel knives, hatchets, blankets, kettles, whiskey, guns, powder, lead and other trade goods for furs collected by the natives. An attempt was made by the Spanish in Spanish California to severely restrict trade from Diego, California to Francisco, California. The land above Francisco, California had no Spanish presence. The Company was created in 1799 as a joint venture between Russian fur traders and United States ship merchants who agreed to purchase seal and otter furs obtained by the Russians. The Russian Czar was to get 20% of all profits. American ships brought food and other supplies to the Russian settlements, assisted in fur hunts, and took furs away.  The company constructed settlements in what is today Alaska, Hawaii, and California.The Russian traders after visiting California in 1806 built Ross, California  in 1812 on the California coast in County, California--just north of San Francisco. This was the southernmost outpost of the Russian-American Company. To keep unwanted Spanish intrusion away the Russians built a palisaded fort equipped with several cannons. Their objective in setting up Ft. Ross was to harvest seals and otters and grow grain and vegetables for the use of other Russian trading centers in Alaska. The fur company at Fort Ross typically had a few score Russians with up to 75 Aleut Eskimos who harvested (usually under some duress) the seals and otters from their kayaks on or near the Islands, the Islands of California and in the ports and bays around Francisco Bay. The Aleuts of Alaska probably had the largest effect on the Channel islands and its people. These otter-hunters from the Islands set up camps on the surrounding Channel Islands and traded with the native peoples in exchange for permission to hunt otters and seals around the island.American Jacob Astor built Astoria on the River in 1811. Under pressure brought by the of 1812 Astor sold the fort to what would become the The British Bay Company. In 1830 Hudson Bay Co. built a new Vancouver slightly up the River in the future state. This fort was the main supply depot for Hudson Bay forts in all the Pacific Northwest. Within a few years they were growing quantities  of wheat, constructed saw and flour mills, and yearly shipped lumber to the Islands and flour to Alaska. They were resupplied every year by two to three ships that brought trading supplies around Horn from England.otters and seals were severely depleted on the California coast and islands by the 1820s. Bay Company entered the coast trade in the 1820s with the intention of driving the Americans away. This was accomplished by about 1840 just as the fur trade industry started dying due to lack of supply and a style change in felt hatsfelt was made from fur. In its late period the fur trade was largely conducted by the British Bay Company and the Company. The depleted supply of sea otters and the easy trade with the British in Vancouver for food stuffs led the Russians to abandon Ross, California in 1841 and sell the cannon and other supplies to Augustus Sutter. The Hudson Bay Company departed from their trading post they had set up in San Francisco in 1845 because of the declining fur trade and the death of their agent there.Beginning in the late colonial period, the United States, with a strong seafaring tradition in England, an advanced shipbuilding industry, with access access to extensive forests and good access to the Ocean, grew to become the pre-eminent whaling nation in the world by the 1830s. Whaling recovered after the Revolutionary War ended in 1783 and the whaling industry began to prosper, using bases primarily at Nantucket island and Bedford, Massachusetts. About ten thousand United States seamen manned whaling ships on voyages that could last over two years. From 1835 to 1860 the American whaling fleet averaged about 620 vessels annually with a shipping tonnage aggregating 190,500 tons. From 1835 to 1860 the annual United States oil usage averaged 118,000 barrels of sperm oil, 216,000 barrels of other whale oil and 2,323,000 pounds of whalebone (baleen)with a total average value of over $8,000,000 a year.(Tower, Sheldon Walter; A History of the American Whale Fishery p.51; John C. Winston Co., Philadelphia, Pa; 1907, Google eBook http://books.google.com/books/about/History_of_the_American_whale_fishery_fr.html?idjkBJAAAAMAAJ) The oil was used primarily in whale lamps for illumination at night and for some lubrication purposes. The baleen was used for corsets, brushes, whips,  and other uses that required a strong flexible materialplastic hadnt been invented yet. Kerosene, when it was introduced in the early 1850s, was much cheaper and easily made by fractional distillation of petroleum. Kerosene started to rapidly replace oil for lighting in the 1850ssaving many more whales than any conservation movement. The Ocean whaling ships started getting fresh supplies, water and wood from California and Sandwich Islands (Hawaii). Many whaling vessels preferred stopping in the Francisco Bay Area before stopping to pay the high custom duties (also called tariffs and Valorem taxes) at California wanted by the Californio government--avoiding taxes has a long history. By 1846 several hundred whaling ships per year were using Hawaii as a temporary base.When California was settled by the Spanish a series of four presidios, or royal forts, manned by 10 to 100 men, were built in Alta California. California installations can be founded in San Diego (El Presidio Real de San Diego) founded in 1769, in San Francisco (El Presidio Real de San Francisco) founded in 1776, and in Santa Barbara (El Presidio Real de Santa Brbara) founded in 1782. After the Spanish colonial era the Presidio of Sonoma in Sonoma, California was founded in 1834. To support the presidios and the missions about four towns called pueblos were established in California. The pueblos of Los Angeles, San Diego, San Francisco, Santa Barbara, Villa de Branciforte (later abandoned before later becoming Cruz, California) and the pueblo of Jose, California were all established to support the Missions and presidios in California. These were the only four small pueblos (towns ) initially in California although later some small settlements grew up around the Mission sites. Trade was controlled from California under rules set up by the Spanish Monarchy and later the Presidents of Mexico, the province capital, where duties were collected and permissions or denial of landing rights were supposed to occur.Even before Mexico gained control of California the onerous Spanish rules against trading with foreigners began to break down as the declining Spanish fleet couldnt enforce their no trading policies. The Californios, with essentially no industries or manufacturing capabilities, were eager to trade for new commodities, finished goods, luxury goods and other merchandise. The Mexican government abolished the no trade with foreign ships policy and soon regular trading trips were being made. The Californios hides and tallow provided the necessary trade articles for a mutually beneficial trade. The first United States, English and Russian trading ships began showing up in California in about 1816.  The classic book Years Before the Mast by Henry Dana, Jr. provides a good first hand account of this trade.( From 1825 to 1848 the average number of ships traveling to California increased to about 25 ships per yeara large increase from the average of 2.5 ships per year from 1769 to 1824.(  The port of entry for trading purposes was California where custom duties (also called tariffs) of about 42-100% were applied. These high duties gave rise to much bribery and smuggling, as avoiding the tariffs made more money for the ship owners and made the goods less costly to the customers. Essentially all the cost of the California government (what little there was) was paid for by these tariffs. In this they were much like the United States in 1850, where about 89% of the revenue of its federal government came from import tariffs, although at an average rate of about 20%.(The States Exploring Expedition was an exploring and surveying expedition of the Pacific Ocean (the Southern Seas) conducted by the United States Navy with five ships from 18381842. The voyage was authorized by Congress in 1836. It is sometimes called the Ex. Ex. for short, or the Wilkes Expedition in honor of its next appointed commanding officer, Navy Lt. Wilkes (17981877). The expedition was of major importance to the growth of oceanography and cartography of the Pacific. Two of these ships were lost from accidentsone on the River in 1841. From the area of modern-day Oregon, an overland party headed by F. Emmons was directed to proceed via an inland route to Francisco Bay. This Emmons party traveled south along the Trail, including the River, making the first official recorded visit by Americans to and scientific note of Shasta, in northern California. The Emmons party rejoined the ships, which had sailed south, in Francisco Bay. After their return Wilkes published the major scientific works Western America, including California and Oregon (1849) and Theory of the Winds (1856).(Follow the Expedition http://www.sil.si.edu/DigitalCollections/usexex/ available on-line from the Smithsonian Institution)The Squadron, established 1821, was part of the States Navy squadron stationed in the Ocean in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Initially with no States ports in the Pacific, they operated out of storeships which provided naval supplies and purchased fresh supplies of food, wood and water from local ports of call in California, Islands and ports and harbors on the Coast. The Squadron was instrumental in the capture of California in the War of 1846 to 1848. After war was declared on 24 April 1846. The American navy with its force of 350-400 Marines and bluejacket Navy sailors on board several ships near California were essentially the only significant United States military force on the Pacific coast in the early months of the MexicanAmerican War. Marines were stationed aboard each warship to assist in close in ship to ship combat for either boarding or repelling boarders and could be detached for use on land. In addition there were some sailors on each ship that could be detached from each vessel for shore duty and still leave the ship functional though short handed.Hostilities between U.S. and Mexican troops commenced in April 1846 with Mexican troops killing and capturing a number of U.S. Army troops in the future state of Texas. The of Palo Alto, the first major battle of the War, was fought on May 8, 1846, a few miles from the modern-day city of Texas. A force of some 3,400 Mexican troops (a portion of the Army of The North) led by Mexican General Arista engaged a force of 2,400 United States troops under General Taylor.  Taylors forces drove the Mexicans from the field. The United States Congress responded to these hostilities  by issuing a of War against Mexico on May 13, 1846the War had began.Speculating that war with Mexico over Texas and other land was very possible, the Navy had sent several additional naval vessels to the Pacific in 1845 to protect U.S. interests there. It took about 200 days, on average, for ships to travel the greater than  trip from the East coast around Horn to California. Initially as the war with Mexico started there were five vessels in the Navys Squadron near California. In 1846 and 1847 this was increased to 13 Navy vesselsover half the Navys available ships.The former fleet surgeon William M. Wood and  John Parrot, the American Consul of Mazatlan, arrived in Guadalajara Mexico on 10 May 1846. There they heard word of the on-going hostilities between the U.S. and Mexico forces and sent a message by special courier back to Commodore Sloat then visiting Mazatlan.  On 17 May 1846 this couriers  messages informed Commodore Sloat that hostilities between the U.S. and Mexico had commenced.(Bancroft, Hubert H.; History of California Vol. XXII 1846-1848;p. 201; The History Company Publishers, San Francisco, 1882 (Google eBook)) Commodore (Admiral) D. Sloat, commander of the Navys Squadron and his fleet of four vessels were then at anchor in the harbor of Mazatlan Mexico.(Bancroft, Hubert H.; History of California Vol. XXII 1846-1848;p. 199; The History Company Publishers, San Francisco, 1882 (Google eBook))  On hearing the news Commodore Sloat dispatched his flagship, the Frigate USS Savannah, and the Sloop USS Levant to Monterey harbor where they arrived on 2 July 1846. They joined the Sloop USS Cyane which was already there.(Cleland, Robert Glass; The History of California; p. 205; The Macmillan Company New York, 1922; Goggle eBook) There were U.S. fears that the British might try to annex California to satisfy British creditors.(op. cit. Cleland, p. 180) The British Stations ships off California were stronger in ships, guns and men.(Hearing rumors of possible Mexican military action against the newly arrived settlers in California (this had already happened in 1840),(Cleland, Robert Glass; A History of California; The Macmillan Company 1922; p. 191;(Google eBook)) some settlers decided to neutralize the small Californio garrison at California. On June 15, 1846, some thirty settlers, mostly former American citizens, staged a revolt and seized the small Californio garrison in Sonoma without firing a shot. Initially there was little resistance from anyone in California as they replaced the dysfunctional and ineffective Mexican governmentwhich already had 40 Presidents in the first 24 years of its existence. Most settlers and Californios were neutral or actively supported the revolt. A. Sutter and his men and supplies at Sutters Fort joined the revolt. They raised the Flag of the Republic over Sonoma. The republic was in existence scarcely more than a week before Frmont returned and took over on June 23 from B. Ide the leader of the Flag Revolt. The California state flag of today is based on this original Bear Flag and still contains the words California Republic.In 1846 the U.S. Navy was under orders to take over all California ports in the event of war. There were about 400500 Marines and Navy bluejacket sailors available for possible land action on the Squadrons ships. Hearing word of the Flag Revolt in California and the arrival of the large British 2,600 ton, 600 man, man-of-war Collingwood (1841), flagship under Sir George S. Seymour, outside Monterey Harbor,  Commodore Sloat was finally stirred to action. On 7 July 1846seven weeks after war had been declared, Commodore D. Sloat instructed the Captains of the  ships:USS Savannah and Sloops: USS Cyane and USS Levant of the Squadron in Bay to occupy Monterey, Californiathe Alta California capital.  Fifty American marines and about 100 bluejacket sailors landed and captured the city without incidentthe few Californio troops formerly there having already evacuated the city. They raised the of the United States without firing a shot. The only shots fired were a 21 gun salute to the new Flag fired by each of the Navy ships in the harbor.(op. cit. Bancroft; p. 252) The British ships observed but took no actiongetting a message to and from Britain requesting new orders to interfere would have taken from one to two years.The abandoned Presidio and San Francisco de Ass (Mission Dolores) at Francisco, (then called Buena), was occupied without firing a shot on 9 July 1846 by Marines and Navy sailors from the Sloop Portsmouth (1843). Militia Captain Fallon led a small force of about 22 men from Cruz, California and captured the small town of Pueblo de San Jose without bloodshed on 11 July 1846. Fallon received an American flag from Commodore John D. Sloat, and raised it over the pueblo on July 14. On 15 July 1846, Commodore (Admiral) D. Sloat  transferred his command of the Squadron to Commodore F. Stockton when Stocktons ship, the Frigate Congress (1841), arrived from the Hawaii. Stockton, a much more aggressive leader, asked Fremont to form a joint force of Fremonts soldiers, scouts, guides etc. and  a volunteer militiamany former Flag Revolters. This unit called the Battalion was mustered into U.S. service and were paid regular army wages.  On July 19, Frmonts newly formed Battalion swelled to about 160 men. These men included Fremonts 30 topographical men and their 30 scouts and hunters, Marine Lieutenant H. Gillespie, a Navy officer to handle their two cannons, a company of Indians trained by Sutter and many other permanent California settlers from several different countries as well as American settlers. The California Battalion members were used mainly to garrison and keep order in the rapidly surrendering California towns. The Navy went down the coast from San Francisco, occupying ports without resistance as they went. The small pueblo (town) of San Diego surrendered 29 July 1846 without a shot being fired. The small pueblo (town) of Santa Barbara surrendered without a shot being fired in August 1846.  On 13 August 1846 a joint force of Marines, bluejacket sailors and parts of Fremonts California Battalion carried by the Cyane (1837) entered Los Angeles, California with flags flying and band playing. Captain H. Gillespie, (Fremonts second in command), with a inadequate force of 40 to 50 men were left to occupy and keep order in the largest town  (about 3,500) in CaliforniaLos Angeles.On July 11 the British Navy sloop HMS Juno enters San Francisco Bay causing Montgomery to man his defenses. The large British ship, 2,600 ton, man-of-war HMS Collingwood, flagship under Sir George S. Seymour, also shows up about this time outside Monterey Harbor. Both British ships observe, but did not enter the conflict.(Marley, David; Wars of the Americas: a chronology of armed conflict in the New World, 1492 to Present 1998); p. 504)Shortly after July 9 when it became clear the American Navy was taking action, the short-lived Bear Flag Republic was converted into a United States military conflict for possession of California and the Flag (the basis for todays Flag) was replaced by the Flag. Fremont expeditionary forces joined forces with a volunteer force of California residents to form a small volunteer militia. The frigate USS Congress was the flagship of Commodore F. Stockton when he took over as the senior United States military commander in California in late July 1846. Stockton asked Fremont to muster the troops and volunteers under his command into the Battalion to help garrison the towns rapidly being captured from the Californios. Most towns surrendered without a shot being fired. Fremonts California Battalion members were sworn in and the volunteers paid the regular United States Army salary of $25.00 a month for privates with higher pay for officers. The California Battalion varied in size with time from about 160 initially to over 450 by January 1847. Pacific Squadron war ships and storeships served as floating store houses keeping Fremonts volunteer force in the California Battalion supplied with powder, shot and supplies as well as transporting them to different California ports. The USS Cyane transported Fremont and about 160 of his men to the small port of San Diego which was captured on 29 July 1846 without a shot being fired.A minor Californio revolt broke out in Los Angeles and the United States force there of 4050 men evacuated the city for a time. Later, U.S.forces fought minor scrimmages in the  of San Pasqual, the of Dominguez Rancho, and the of Rio San Gabriel. After the Los Angeles revolt started the California Battalion was expanded to a force of about 400 men. In early January 1847 a 600 man joint force of Marine, Navy bluejacket sailors, General W. Kearnys 80 Army dragoons (cavalrymen) and about two companies of Fremonts Battalion re-occupied Los Angeles after some minor skirmishesafter four months the same Flag again flew over Los Angeles.  The minor armed resistance in California ceased when the Californios signed the of Cahuenga on January 13, 1847. The Californios who had wrested control of California from Mexico in 1845 now had a new government.(Californios revolt 1845 http://calrepublic.tripod.com/history.html Accessed 25 July 2009)After the Treaty of Cahuenga was signed, the Squadron then went on to capture all California cities and harbors and sink or capture all the Mexican Pacific Navy they could find. Baja California was returned to Mexico in subsequent of Guadalupe Hidalgo negotiations.  More reinforcements of about 320 soldiers (and a few women) of the Battalion arrived at San Diego, California on 28 January 1847after hostilities had ceased. They had been recruited from the Mormon camps on the Riverabout  away. These troops were recruited with the understanding they would be discharged in California with their weapons. Most were discharged before July 1847. More reinforcements in the form of Colonel D. Stevensons Regiment of New York Volunteers of about 648 men showed up in MarchApril 1847again after hostilities had ceased. Three private merchant ships, Thomas H Perkins, Loo Choo, and Susan Drew, were chartered, and the sloop USS Preble was assigned convoy detail. On 26 September the four ships left New York for California. Fifty men who had been left behind for various reasons sailed on 13 November 1846 on the small storeship USS Brutus. The Susan Drew and Loo Choo reached Valparaiso, Chile by 20 January 1847 and after getting fresh supplies, water and wood were on their way again by 23 January. The Perkins did not stop until San Francisco, reaching port on 6 March 1847. The Susan Drew arrived on 20 March 1847 and the Loo Choo arrived on 26 March 1847, 183 days after leaving New York. The Brutus finally arrived on 17 April 1847. After desertions and deaths in transit, four ships brought Stevensons 648 men to California. Initially they took over all of the Pacific Squadrons on-shore military and garrison duties and the Mormon Battalion and California Battalions garrison duties. The New York Volunteer companies were deployed from San Francisco in Alta California to Paz, Mexico in California. The ship Isabella sailed from Philadelphia on 16 August 1847, with a detachment of one hundred soldiers, and arrived in California on 18 February 1848, the following year, at about the same time that the ship Sweden arrived with another detachment of soldiers. These soldiers were added to the existing companies of Stevensons Regiment of New York Volunteers. These troops were recruited with the understanding they would discharged in California. When gold was discovered in late January 1848, many of Stevensons troops deserted.California Gold Rush ShippingThe first to hear confirmed information of the Gold Rush were the people in Oregon, the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii), Mexico, Peru and Chile and they were the first to start flocking to the state in late 1848. By the end of 1848, some 6,000 Argonauts had come to California.(Starr, Kevin and Richard J. Orsi (eds.) (2000). Rooted in barbarous soil: people, culture, and community in Gold Rush California}; p.48; Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-22496-5) President K. Polk made the official announcement of the discovery of gold in California during his State of the Union Address on December 5, 1848 and displayed about 300 ounces of California gold at the War Department. Excitement grew as rumors, reports of officers and soldiers in California, newspaper accounts all seemed to confirm that there was a tremendous amount of gold in Californiawaiting to be picked up and the ease of getting it. Sam Brannan, publisher of the Alta California at San Francisco, is regarded as starting the Gold Rush with stories about the amount of gold throughout late 1848 and 1849. He then became Californias first millionaire by mining the miners with the sale of provisions. These forty-niners left behind families and jobs in the hope of instant wealth. A few succeeded, but the gold fields destroyed some and disappointed many more. Americans and foreigners of many different countries, statuses, classes, and races rushed to California for gold. Almost all (~96%) were young men under 40.(California 1850 and 1852 Census http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/Historical_Publications/1850/1850a-31.pdf Accessed 10 Mar 2011)  in the California Gold Rush were few and had many opportunities to do new things and take on new tasks in women poor California. Argonauts, as they were often called, walked over the Trail or came by sea. About 80,000 Argonauts arrived in 1849 aloneabout 40,000 over the California trail and 40,000 by sea. In April 1850, a harbor masters estimate counted 62,000 people from across the globe arriving in San Francisco by ship in the preceding 12 months. Hundreds of ships lay abandoned, anchored in Francisco Bay, their passengers and crews out searching for gold.  According to Golden State historian Riccardo Gaudino, the Napa Valley became the first wheat granary, not only for the food staple, but also growing barley and hops to fill the demand of these thirsty men who wanted to drink beer.A popular concept of the Gold Rush portrays the overland migration by wagon, yet according to the evidence, more people journeyed by sea. A significant factor in this maritime traffic was cargosupplies, food, tools, lumber etc. for miners and an expanding population. Sea transport, was about the only way cargo of any kind could be delivered to California. Carrying material cross country by wagon over  of bad road was a slow costly process that was seldom done. Research dcouments show that there were more Portuguese whalers off the California coast than the population on the ranchos. In 1846, the first European rural labor was imported to the Pacific for farm labor on the Sandwich Islands from the Portuguese Azores. Not until the Railroad was completed in 1869 was there any easy way to ship cargo to California. Even today bulky or heavy heavy cargo is usually shipped by ship because it is cheap and efficient, though slower than other methods. Some enterprising migrants set up businesses to furnish, feed, and entertain the regions growing population. Merchants were more likely to prosper than prospectors. Failed miners became settlers, and San Francisco boomed. The population of California grew from 8,000 in 1846 to about 120,000 in 1850. The majority of the California Argonauts (as they were frequently called) were young Anglo men from the United States. But many Latins from Chile and Lima-Peru: a mix of indiginents, Spanish, seafaring Genovese Italians and Jewish traders. Those on the East Coast, who could afford the accomodations and bordellos, traveled with ships via New Orleans, Mexico and Central America routes to California. Those who lacked the wealth usually went by wagon as they had the self-reliant experience and often much of the supplies and equipment for a long wagon trip.There were three main ways to get to California by land in 1848 and later: overland by wagon train from the Trail, across the desert via the Gila Trail or for winter travel from by the Salt Lake City to Los Angeles Trail. All land routes were restricted as to the seasons where travel was feasible. The trip by wagon was a four to six month ordeal across over  of land from a River town to California or across the deserts of Arizona or Nevada. Those going by wagon train could not leave until the trails were dry and enough grass had started to feed their livestockusually early May.The Paddlewheel SteamerFile:Branson Belle run aground on poverty point-12Dec2010.jpg|thumb|260px|The Branson Belle on Rock Lake in Branson, U.S.A. is a stern-wheeler showboat. It is run aground in this picture.File:SS-Savannah.jpg|thumb|right|260px|Savannah the first steam powered ship to cross the Ocean--1819By 1849 the shipping industry was in transition from sail powered boats to steam powered boats and from wood construction to an ever increasing metal construction.  There were basically three different types of ships being used: standard ships of several different types.(Early American Sailing Ships http://www.keyshistory.org/ASS-Amer-Sail-Ships.html accessed 2 Feb 2011) Clippers, and steamers with paddles mounted on the side or rear. River steam boats typically used rear mounted paddles and had flat bottoms and shallow hulls designed to carry large loads on generally smooth and occasionally shallow rivers. Ocean going steamers typically used side wheeled paddles and used narrower deeper hulls designed to travel in the often stormy weather encountered at sea. The ship hull design was often based on the Clipper ship design with extra bracing to support the loads and strains imposed by the paddle wheels when they encountered rough water.The first paddle-steamer to make a long ocean voyage was the 320 ton  long Savannah, built in 1819 expressly for ship mail and passenger service to and from Liverpool England. On May 22, 1819, the watch on the Savannah sighted Ireland after 23 days at sea. The Iron Works of New York supplied Savannahss cylinder,(Swann, p. 5.) while the rest of the engine components and running gear were manufactured by the Ironworks of Jersey. The 90-horsepower low-pressure engine was of the inclined direct-acting type, with a single  cylinder and a  stroke. Savannahs engine and machinery were unusually large for their time. The ships wrought-iron paddlewheels were 16 feet in diameter with eight buckets per wheel. For fuel, the vessel carried 75 tons of coal and 25 cords of wood.(Smithsonian, p. 618.)The SS Savannah was too small to carry much fuel and the engine was intended only for use in calm weather and to get in and out of harbors. Under favorable winds the sails alone were able to provide a speed of at least four knots. The Savannah was judged not a commercial success and its engine was removed and it was converted back to a regular ship. By 1848 steamboats built by both States and British shipbuilders  were already in use for mail and passenger service across the Oceana  journey.Britannia 1840 paddlewheel.jpg|250px|thumb|right|260px|Britannia of 1840 (1150 GRT), the first Cunard liner built for the transatlantic service.Image:SS California Poster Sharpened.jpg|thumb|260px|right|California (1848), Mail Steamship Companys first ship to steam between Panama and San Francisco.Since steamers typically required from 5 to 16 tons of coal per day to keep their engines running, they were more expensive to run. Initially, nearly all sea going steamboats were equipped with mast and sails to supplement the engine power and provide power for occasions when the steam engine needed repair or maintenance.  These steamships typically concentrated on high value cargo, mail and passengers and only had moderate cargo capabilities because of their required loads of coal. The typical paddle wheel steamship was powered by a coal burning engine that required firemen to shovel the coal to the burners.(Steam Ship SS California http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~npmelton/psc_indx.htm Accessed 27 Jan 2011)(Steam Ship SS California specifications:  http://www.apl.com/history/timeline/1848.htm accessed 27 Jan 2011)By 1849 the screw propeller had been invented and was slowly being introduced as iron increasingly was used in ship construction and the stress introduced by propellers could be compensated for.  As the 1800s progressed the timber and lumber needed to make wooden ships got ever more expensive and the iron plate needed for iron ship construction got much cheaper as the massive iron works at Tydfil Wales, for example, got ever more efficient. The propeller put a lot of stress on the rear of the ships and would not see large spread use till the conversion from wood boats to iron boats was completewell underway by 1860. By the 1840s the ocean going steam ship industry was well established as the Line and others demonstrated.Starting in 1848 Congress had subsidized the Mail Steamship Company with $199,999 to set up regular ship, mail, passenger and cargo routes in the Ocean. This was to be a regular scheduled route from Panama, Nicaragua and to and from San Francisco and Oregon.  The Atlantic Ocean mail contract from East Coast cities and Orleans, Louisiana to and from the River in Panama was won by the States Mail Steamship Company whose first steamship, the SS Falcon (1848) was dispatched on 1 December 1848 to the Caribbean terminus of the of Panama trail--the River. The California (1848), the first Mail Steamship Company steamship, showed up in San Francisco, loaded with about twice the passengers it had been designed for, on February 28, 1849. It had made the trip from Panama and Mexico after steaming around Horn from New York. Other steamships soon followed and by late 1849 paddle wheel steamships like the SS Mckim (1848)(San Francisco Ships http://www.maritimeheritage.org/ships/ss.html Accessed 20 Apr 2011) were carrying miners the  trip from San Francisco up the extensive  San Joaquin River Delta to California, California, Sacramento, etc. to get about  closer to the gold fields. Steam powered tugboats and towboats started working in the Francisco Bay soon after this to expedite shipping in and out of the bay. As the passenger, mail and high value freight business to and from California boomed more and more steamers were brought into service--eleven by the Mail Steamship Company alone. About 20% of the California Argonauts are thought to have returned to their homes, mostly on the East Coast of the United States. Some returned with their wives, family and/or sweethearts. Most used the Panama Route. Between the 1849 and 1869 when the Transcontinental Railroad was completed across the United States about 800,000 travelers used the Panama route.(Delagdo, James P.; To California by Sea; p.66; University of South Carolina Press (October 1, 1996); ISBN 978-1570031533) Most of the millions of dollars of gold that was found in California were shipped East via the Panama route on steamers. After 1855 when the Railroad was completed the Panama Route was the quickest and easiest way to get to or from California.  The sinking of the Central America loaded with gold influenced the US Congress to pass the trans-continental railroad legislation.The Sailing  shipsImage:Colombian Training Ship ARC Gloria.jpg|thumb|260px|Colombian training ship ARC Gloria at sunset in ColombiaRegular ships that had been developed and refined over centuries of use were the cheapest and the slowest transports available. There were several types of sailing ships. They had typically been optimized to carry a large amount of cargo using a small crew of about 20 men and utilized sails in a combination of and aft riging and rigging. Unless the cargo was time sensitive, they were utilized for nearly all long distance shipping and passenger service. At the end of the sailing era windjammers were developed to carry large volumes of low value cargo long distances. Some of the most popular ships were four-masted barques, since the four-masted barque is considered the most efficient rig available because of its ease of handling, small need of manpower, good running capabilities, and good capabilities of rising toward wind.Once in San Francisco the crews often deserted the ships. The ship owners found little cargo of value to ship back to the East Coast out of California and the ships often went back in ballast with a cargo of useless rocks.  Since many of the ships were older and required expensive maintenance and crews were very hard to find and/or very expensive  many hundreds of vessels were simply abandoned or sold at very low cost in Francisco Bay. Others were converted into store ships or floating warehouses, stores, hotels, prisons, etc.. Some abandoned ships were bought cheap, filled with ballast and sunk on the mud flats at high tide to enlarge the available  wharves and docks. The ships were typically stripped of her upper works and all usable fittings by one of San Franciscos many marine salvage firms of Gold Rush days and then covered with debris and sand as developers filled in the mud flats on the bay and built wharves out to deeper water to accommodate docking ships. By 1857 nearly all abandoned shipping in the Francisco Bay that had not been re-used was sent to a marine salvage or breaking firms where all usable fixtures, anchors,  etc. were removed, the copper bottom (about  of copper) salvaged and the timbers were removed and set aside for other uses. The rapidly expanding city of Francisco needed room to store all of the incoming goods and much larger dockside facilities--there were none when California was annexed. There initially was not time to build adequate warehouses, wharves, docks on the water front. In early September 2001, the General Harrison, was discovered at the northwest corner of Battery and Clay streets during construction. She was built in 1840 in Massachusetts and abandoned sometime before 1850 and turned into a store ship (warehouse).  She was  long,  wide,  in depth anddisplaced 409 tons. She  was burned to the water line in one of San Franciscos early fires. The remains, including some of the stores on board, were filled with sand and built over.( Discovery of shipGeneeral Harrisonhttp://www.archeo-tec.com/sites/gen_harrison/page1/ Accessed 22 Jun 2011)File:Airbayarea.JPG|thumb|right|260px|Aerial view of Francisco Bay looking east from the Pacific.The average realized speed for the typical sailing ship was about per hour, the Clippers could often reach about per hour of realized speed with steam ships averaging about per hour. The trips by steamship to Panama and Nicaragua from York, Philadelphia and Boston were about  long and took about two weeks. Trips across the of Panama or Nicaragua typically took about one week. The  trip to Francisco, California could be done by side wheel steamer in about three weeks. In addition to this travel time via the Panama route typically had a two to four week waiting period to find a ship going from City, Panama to Francisco, California. Once in San Francisco the Argonauts typically took a steamer (starting in1849) to California or California to get closer to the gold fields.The ClippersAn advertisement of an American clipper ship of the 1850sThe Clippers, developed and mainly used between about 1840 and 1860 were some of the last and best commercial sailing ships invented. The Clippers had more sails and faster hulls and were some of the fastest sailing ships ever developed. The Clippers required a larger crew to man the larger expanse of sails and typically carried high value cargo with few passenger accommodations.  Under ideal conditions Clippers have been logged at over covering over  in one day. The average speed over a long journey was about . The typical Clipper carried high value, large volume cargo and normally carried only about six passengers. They competed with the steamers on the shorter Panama, Nicaragua, and Mexican routes. Because of their shorter runs these steamers were faster but much more costly to run and typically only took high value cargo like passengers, mail and gold shipments. Clippers averaged about 120 days passage on the about  trip between East Coast cities and Franciscoabout 80 days faster to travel the conventional ships.In 1845 the Rainbow, 757 tons OM, the first extreme clipper was launched in New York. These American clippers were larger vessels designed to sacrifice cargo capacity for speed. They had a bow lengthened above the water, a drawing out and sharpening of the forward body, and the greatest breadth further aft. Extreme clippers were built in the period 1845 to 1855. Clippers sometimes took a trip across the Ocean to Shanghai or some other port in China to pick up a cargo of tea, silk, porcelain, etc. for a profitable return trip to their home port. The alternative was to return in ballast with a useless cargo of rocks. Some Clippers were used on the Hawaii to California routes as they shipped mainly food stocks to California.In 1853 the Clipper Flying Cloud sailed from York City and made Francisco around Horn in 89 days, 8 hours; a record that stood 136 years until 1989 when the breakthrough-designed sailboat Thursdays Child(Fisher, Lawrence M. (Feb. 13, 1989). Thursdays Child Sails In, Sets Mark. New York Times (New York edition): pp. C2. http://www.nytimes.com/1989/02/11/sports/overtaking-a-clipper-ship-after-135-years.html?pagewanted1. Retrieved 2010-03-03)  completed the passage in 80 days, 20 hours. The record was once again broken in 2008 by the special built French racing yacht 13, with a time of 43 days and 38 minutes.To California via Panamaright|thumb|260px|Map of the route across Panama and the Panama RailroadBy mid 1849 there were steamship lines dropping people from off at the mouth of the River on the Caribbean side of Panama.  There were then no docking facilities off the Chagres River mouth and passengers had to come ashore in small boatsnot an easy task in bad weather. The east to west transit across the of Panama was about  by native dugout boats (later modified lifeboats were used) up the often wild and dangerous River and then by mule back for the final  over the old Spanish trails. The trails had fallen into serious disrepair after almost 50+ years of little or no maintenance and up to 3 meters of rain each year in the roughly April to December rainy season. One of the major problems was getting reliable transport of luggage and freight over the Isthmus of Panama. Even after all arrangements were made and payments made it was not unusual to have to wait weeks longer in Panama City for your luggage to arrive. A transit from the Atlantic to the Pacific (or from Pacific to Atlantic) would usually take four to eight days by dugout canoe and mule back. The transit was fraught with dangers and disease. After the arrival in City the traveler had to wait in a hot, dirty, crowded, disease laden city for their luggage to arrive and then for passage on a steamer to California. One of the main problems initially encountered was getting further passage on a ship to California--there were not enough steamers to carry the passengers and cargo that built up in Panama City. By late 1849 steamer routes had been established to and from City and other ports in Nicaragua and Mexico  to San Francisco. City had a poor harbor and again the ships anchored off shore and a small boat was required to board them.Those going to California by crossing Panama, Nicaragua or Mexico had a much quicker trip than going around Horn or taking the Trail to California. A typical trip could be done in about 3090 days assuming shipping and transit connections could be made. The biggest handicap the Panama, Nicaragua or Mexico routes had was the wait until scheduled Pacific shipping was established in late 1849 to carry them to California. These routes also suffered form the risk of catching a possibly fatal disease and having to potentially endure threats of attack by bandits. Unfortunately, getting shipping from the Pacific ports of Panama, Nicaragua, or Mexico to California was very problematic until mid to late 1849. Mail, returning gold miners and gold shipments nearly all used the Panama Route. The number of passengers who used the Panama route in 1849 and 1850 is unknown but must be numbered in the tens of thousands. In 1851 29,600 passengers used the Panama Route. This increased to 33,000 passengers in 1852 and dropped to 27,200 passengers in 1853.(Delgado, James P.; To California by Sea: A Maritime History of the California Gold Rush; p. 59; University of South Carolina Press (October 1, 1996); ISBN 978-1570031533) by the time the Transcontinental Railroad was completed in the United States in 1869 its believed 800,000 travelers had used the Panama Route to get to and from California.(Delgado, James P.; To California by Sea: A Maritime History of the California Gold Rush; p. 66; University of South Carolina Press (October 1, 1996); ISBN 978-1570031533) Its estimated that 20% of the original Argonauts left to return home--most via the Panama Route. Many returned to California with their wives and families.As steamships became available, regular steamer service opened a major mail, passenger and high value cargo link between the two coasts of the United States. The first transcontinental railroad, the Railroad, was finished in 1855 at a cost of about 5,000 lives and $8,000,000 and provided a major faster link with the East Coast and West Coast. Regardless of how the miners had originally got to California nearly all returned back East via Panamathe easiest and fastest route. The returning miners and the returning gold were welcomed in the East and the mail and newspapers exchanged soon established strong east-west bonds. After it was completed in 1855 the ease of use of the Panama Railroad meant that the Panama Route carried most of the high value, time sensitive freight to and from California.  Most female traffic went from east to west over the Panama Route which was the easiest and fasted route after about 1852. in the California Gold Rush were scarce but played an major role in settling California. Wives and sweethearts passage via Panama to California was normally paid for by miners or businessmen who had decided to stay in California. These women arriving in nearly every ship from Panama soon changed the character of women scarce California as they rapidly out numbered the prostitutes who had initially flocked there.Money in California was scarce as very few had brought much with them and the costly living expenses soon exhausted much of it. Shipments of specie were brought in but they never seemed to be enough and workers were happy to be paid in a amalgam of several different coins from several different countries. Loose gold dust was valued at $16.00 per troy ounce then and almost all merchants, bars, gambling dens etc. had scales available to allow the miners to pay for their purchases in gold. After passing though many hands in California gold eventually, almost inevitably, went East to pay for merchandise bought in the west and imported from the East. The primary gold shipment route was via well guarded steamers to and from Panama. Gold shipments on Panama steamers often totaled over $1,000,000 per voyage and totaled over $64,000,000 in gold by 1853.(Delgado, James P.; op. cit.; p.66)To California via Mexicosatelital.jpg|thumb|right|260px||Satellite view of VeracruzThe Mexican route usually involved taking passage in a steamer to Vera Cruz Mexico, making your way  across Mexico to Acapulco on Mexicos Pacific coast. This reversed the path taken by much of the Galleons cargo from Manila which was unloaded at Acapulco Mexico and transferred to Veracruz for further shipment to Spain The Manila Galleon was Spains main link to the spices from the Islands and silk etc. from China. By 1849 the steamer had been developed and Veracruz soon became a scheduled stop for many steamers. One of the main hazards of this route was being accosted by robbers and it was recommended that this passage should by done in groups of 50 or more.(Lewis, Oscar; Sea Routes To The Gold Fields - The Migration By Water To California In 1849-1852; p. 1; Oakley Press 2007; ISBN-978-1406768961) After the Railroad was completed in 1855 with a cost of about 5,000 lives and $8,000,000 the Mexico route was almost shut down.Other longer routes typically involved landing at Mexico and then traversing the country to catch a ship in Mexico. These routes were used mainly by those who had business in City or some other Mexican city. All Mexican travel suffered from the relative lack of steamship service and risk of robberies compared to the Nicaragua and Panama route.To California via NicaraguaImage:NicaraguaCanalPanorama.jpg|thumb|right|260px|Artists conception of the proposed canal showing the San Juan River, Nicaragua and the Caribbean SeaWider than Panama the Nicaragua route had the advantage of the easily navigated San Juan River and Nicaragua with only a short excursion to the Pacific. By 1851 trips by steamship to Panama and Nicaragua from York, Philadelphia, Boston and Orleans were about  long and took about two weeks by steamship. Commodore Vanderbilt established a route through Nicaragua in 1850 that would shorten the water distance between York and Francisco by nearly 500 miles (800 km). The route was by steamer to the San Juan River in Nicaragua and then up the river by small steamboat or native craft to Nicaragua. After transiting the lake by small boat the travelers could exit and take a stagecoach or mule ride to Juan del Sur or other city in the Pacific side of Nicaragua. From there it was a short steamer ride to San Francisco after steamship lines were established. By early 1852 Vanderbilt was employing seven steamers and offering serious competition to the Panama route.Early travelers til about 1851 had a difficult time knowing if and when a steamer would arrive. Vanderbilt started his service with steamer steamer Independence in July 1851 and was soon joined by the steamer Prometheus and Pacific. The line prospered offering serious competition to the Mail Steamship Company. By 1852 there are a recorded 17,400 Nicaragua crossing passengers compared to 29,600 crossing Panama. These numbers closed to 24,000 Nicaragua crossings in 1852 to 27,200 Panama crossings in 1853.(Delgado, James P.; The Maritime History of the California Gold Rush;p. 59; University of South Carolina Press, 1990; ISBN 978-1570031533) As the Railroad progressed across the Isthmus of Panama they took more and more of the traffic and after the railroad was completed in 1855 with a cost of about 5,000 lives and $8,000,000, combined with civil strife in Nicaragua, the Nicaragua route was almost shut down.To California via HornWhen news of the Gold Rush was confirmed late in 1848 many on the East Coast were ready to start on their way to California. The route was well known because of the many whaling ships who had already traversed Horn on their way to Pacific whaling grounds or ports of call in Hawaii and California. Moreover due to the extensive whaling industry, ships were available in profusion; and was not the ocean the traditional Yankee highway? In most East coastal cities there were mariners who were well acquainted with the Horn route and who knew precisely how to prepare for a voyage to California. One of the chief advantages of the Cape Horn route was that  those going by Horn or the of Magellan could leave at any time of the year they could find a ship.  Then there were Argonauts who foresaw the broad needs and demands of a mining center on the Pacific Coast and who brought along goods of all descriptions and sizes, from needles to knocked-down steamboats, on which they hoped to realize good profits. Indeed, some had no intention to do actual mining but to earn their fortune by providing goods and services to the miners.Most passengers initially got sea-sick and spent a miserable time before getting their sea legs. The nature of the passage involving crossing the equator twice and the length of the average voyage in miles and time-often more than six months-meant unusual supply difficulties. Some ships stocked chickens, pigs and/or goats to supply fresh eggs and meat some time during the voyage. Large amounts of fresh water and food (usually salted meat and sea biscuits or hardtack) were required for the trip. The salted meat (about the only way meat could be preserved then) would have to be soaked overnight in fresh water to leach out the salt and make it semi-edible. Most Captains understood the causes of scurvy and provided some lemon or lime juice to prevent it. Despite the monotonous and often tasteless fare many gained weight on the trip as they had virtually nothing to do except occasional laundry and endless card games. Storms were a time of high suspense as the storm tossed their ship heavily from side to side and end to end. Goods, suitcases, etc. not tied down were soon rolling and sliding  across the decks.  Clothes were often washed by tying them to a rope and letting them be pulled behind the ship. Many spent hours fishing but rarely caught anything. When fish were caught they were a welcome addition to the monotonous diet. Sleeping was often done in crowded passenger quarters or on the deckweather permitting. If the weather was fine and the crew permitted it many tied a hammock in the rigging and slept outside. Those who purchased cabin fare usually had a narrow cabin with a door and a cot that was under  long (people were shorter then) and about  wide. The only extra room was the space under the bed for personal effects and luggage. Those who paid steerage fares (about 50% less) slept in common bunk rooms.It was common practice to stop at a least two ports en-route in order to take on additional supplies of fresh food, water and wood as well as a welcome chance to get off the ships. de Janeiro or Catarina (island), Brazil (often called St. Catharines then) were common stopping places on the Atlantic side of America. Some passengers were so desperate for fresh food that they often procured thousands of oranges or other fruit that was ripe while they were there and ate it after they continued on.The of Magellan comprises a navigable sea route immediately south of mainland America and north of del Fuego.  The waterway is the most important natural passage between the Pacific and the Atlantic oceans, but it is considered a difficult route to navigate because of the unpredictable winds and currents and the narrowness of the passage.Image:South America southern tip pol.png|thumb|260px|of Magellan, and del FuegoCaptains who elected to utilize the of Magellan to bypass Horn and shorten the trip by about  experienced a passage of from three to six weeks duration in surroundings so forbidding and monotonous it often provoked despair. The narrow channels of the straits the unpredictable currents, tides, and winds were constant hazards, especially to sailing vessels--steamed powered vessels had an easier passage.Image:Drake passage en.png|thumb|right|260px|Drake Passage showing the boundary points A, B, C, D, E and F accorded by the of Peace and Friendship of 1984 between Chile and ArgentinaThe other main way around South America was by way of Passage south of Horn. It is the body of water between the southern tip of America at Horn, Chile and the Shetland Islands of Antarctica.  It connects the southwestern part of the Ocean (Sea) with the southeastern part of the Ocean and extends into the Ocean. The passage is named after the 16th century English privateer Francis Drake who was the first to discover the passage in 1578. Most sailing ship Captains preferred the Drake Passage, which is open water for hundreds of miles, despite being often marked by very rough conditions and high winds. There is no significant land anywhere around the world at the 55.6 to 62.8 degrees South latitudes of the Drake Passage, which is important to the unimpeded flow of the Circumpolar Current which carries a huge volume of water (about 600 times the flow of the River) through the Passage and around Antarctica. There are nearly always strong currents and  high winds in Drakes Passagecalled the Forties.In the Pacific Fernndez Islands of  Talcahuano, Valparaiso Chile or Callao Peru were among the favorite watering and re-stocking ports in the Pacific. Valparaiso, despites its mediocre harbor, then was the main  (trans-shipping) port on the Pacific side of South America. After leaving the South America coast the ships were buffeted by often baffling and contrary breezes as they traveled across the equatorial trade winds before reaching California waters. Contrary winds often forced the ships far out into the Pacific-sometimes as distant as 140 degrees west (-140) longitude before they encountered a favorable on shore breeze and could sail towards San Francisco Bay. San Francisco is at -122.5 degrees longitude.The last hazards to California-bound vessels were the approach and entrance to Francisco Bay.  The Spanish had picked California as their first Capitol due to its easier and safer approach to the harbor as well as having a  better climate. The Islands off the mouth of Francisco Bay were the graveyard of several ships, and the narrow, often fog-shrouded opening into the bay was always a danger. Soon after the ship traffic built up ship pilots who were knowledgeable of the bay were at work boarding incoming (and outgoing) ships and guiding the ships to a safe anchorage in the bay. By 1851 the tangle of ships in the Bay had led to the creation of a Harbourmaster who dictated where ships could drop anchor. Once inside San Francisco Bay, vessels were reported and identified to the people of San Francisco by the watchman with a telescope in a tower erected in September 1849 on Hill, San Francisco. The watchman signaled the presence of incoming ships to the people in the city by hoisting up the telegraph mast one semaphore arm for a schooner, two for a brig, three for a ship and two raised about 45 degree semaphore signals for a steamer. These signals were soon known by most residents of San Francisco.Once inside the Bay and anchored the next visitors were typically members of the Cutter Service (predecessor of Coast Guard). Founded by Alexander Hamilton on 4 August 1790, the Revenue Cutter Service is the United States oldest continuous seagoing service and enforced the tarrif laws and tariff collection via custom duties (tariffs or ad-valorem taxes) on foreign import goods. In the 1800s about 85%-95% of the money collected and used by the Federal Government were from tariff collections. Custom collections were set up by late 1847 in Francisco, California--the designated of entry for most of California. The all sea trip around Horn to California by the standard sailing vessels typically took about 200 days (about 6.5 months) and covered from } to }. Some trips took almost a year. The all sea route enabled enterprising emigrants to ship baggage and supplies they hoped to sell in California for gold dust. The Cape Horn route was essentially the only route where low, medium or high weight or high volume goods could be shipped cheaply. Other routes, which often cost significantly more, usually specialized in high value, low weight goods like mail, passengers or gold dust. Starting out with essentially nothing, goods from the East Coast or Britain were often desperately needed and usually sold for high profits.  The long delay between seeing a market, ordering the goods and shipping the goods made business risky. Some of the cargoes that were usually profitable were food, liquor, lumber and building supplies.  Other ship loads of goods when they showed up saturated the marketplace and the goods often had to be auctioned off at a loss. Most cargoes included a variety of goods to minimize this problem. When the Pacific Railroad started construction of the railroad in 1863 all their locomotives, box cars, rails and railroad supplies were shipped via this route. It might be slow but a ship going around Horn to California could carry high weight and high volume products cheaper than anything else.  Nearly all the ships that were abandoned in Francisco Bay came by the Cape Horn route. Since the route back to the East coast was so long and return cargo almost nonexistent the ships which arrived in San Francisco, initially tended to stay there as the crew and passengers abandoned the ship for the gold fields. As it became clear what was needed in San Francisco and the rest of California some of the newer ships were put back into service with higher paid crews. Some were put back into service crewed by disillusioned gold diggers seeking a cheap way back home. Many ships were used for shorter runs to Pacific ports for food supplies or lumber--essentially all that was available then. During October 1849, 63 vessels left San Francisco; 25 sailed for South America, primarily Valparaiso or Callao; 10 vessels sailed for the Hawaiian islands (20-30 days each way), 9 went to Oregon and the 9 to other non-Pacific ports.(Delgado, James P.; To California by Sea; p.79-81; University of South Carolina Press; 1990; ISBN 0-87249-673-2) The high fares initially charged for paddle steamer passages to Panama induced some Captains to allow passengers to work their way back to the East Coast for a low cost return. This made it possible to put a crew together at a reasonable cost.To California from ChinaNews of the California Gold Strike arrived in China by the end of 1848. Only a few hundred Chinese traveled to California in 1849; but this turned into a steady flood as travel arrangements were worked out by 1851 and later. The Revolution in China and the poverty and violence in China induced many Chinese to leave China searching for a way to earn a better living. Most Chinese, like most early California travelers, came to California with the goal of quickly making enough money to pay for their passage and improve their own and their familys status and lifestyle in China after they returned.Nearly all Chinese immigrants to California were young men with almost no women. Their wives, families and relatives remained in China.  The Chinese tended to congregate in heavily male small semi-isolated China Towns wherever they settled. One of the primary problems they encountered in California was the acute lack of Chinese women--almost none initially immigrated. This problem was somewhat alleviated when recruiters ending up procuring or buying Chinese prostitues and shipping them to the United States. There they went to work in brothels or were bought by wealthy Chinese. Some of the more affluent Chinese in California could buy a Chinese mistress for about $300 to $500. The large population, the common condition of extreme poverty in China and the low status of women in China made recruiting or buying women for this profession fairly easy in China.Nearly all these Chinese men initially planned to return to China once they had made enough money. About half of the initial Chinese immigrants did return to China where their wives and families lived. Most of the Chinese immigrants booked their passages on ships with the Mail Steamship Company (founded 1848) or on the American China Clippers who often left California empty and looking for a new cargo before returning home.  Nearly all Chinese immigrants neither spoke and understood English nor were they familiar with culture and life. While in the United States they had little incentive to assimilate into the dominate culture or learn anything more than a rudimentary English language skills. They did nearly all their business with a few Chinese business men that established businesses in California China Towns. The hostility they experienced from nearly all other cultures in America and their belief that they would return to China often discouraged them from even attempting to assimilate.  The bankers and shipping companies, who first backed the emigration project with British trading companies, then turned to Italy for the Whitening of America project by promoting the gold in the streets dream to fill cheap, foreign labor contracts.Port of San FranciscoImage:SanFranciscoharbor1851c sharp.jpg|left|thumb|upright1.5|Merchant ships fill Francisco harbor in 1850 or 1851The port of Francisco initially starting out as only a few ramshackle buildings with a population of about 180 in 1846 grew rapidly to several thousand residents only a few years later. San Francisco was the nearest seaport to the gold fields with full access to virtually all on going sea traffic and freight shipments. The port of San Francisco boomed and expanded very rapidly to a California state census population of about 32,000 in 1852 (The San Francisco --the largest city in the state--U.S. California Census of 1850 was burned in one of the frequent fires in San Francisco(California U.S. 1850 Census (corrected population over 120,000)http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/Historical_Publications/1850/1850a-31.pdf Accessed 8 Aug 2011)). In addition San Francisco had access to the  San Joaquin River Delta which gave access to ship traffic going to Sacramento, Stockton and California which were all about  closer to the goldfields. steamers were put in service by late 1849 and provided easy transport of passengers and freight to California, etc.--the start of the gold country. San Francisco soon boomed as the chief entrepot (port) of California. Homes, hotels, banks, bar rooms, gambling establishments, wharfs, warehouses and other needed buildings were built as rapidly as possible.  There were many Argonauts and companies of Argonauts who foresaw the broad needs and demands of a rapidly increasing and hopefully wealthy population in California. Many Argonauts brought along goods of all descriptions and sizes, from needles to knocked-down steamboats, on which they hoped to sell and realize good profits. Indeed, many had no intention of panning gold or of digging for it in the mines. They would rather sell goods and go into a business which the new mining community would support. After all, gold was the objective; what did it matter whether the means of attaining it were direct or indirect? Ships provided almost the only link for new supplies--overland travel was too difficult and took too long. One downside that soon developed in California was the long delay in communication between the east and west coast. It took over 40 days to get a message back to the Coast of the United States and often over 200-300 days to get new supplies shipped in by ships. Only high priced and lighter and smaller items could take the shorter and quicker steamer route over the of Panama, nearly everything else had to travel the approximate  and over 200 day route all ship route around Horn or the of Magellan. Higher priced, time sensitive goods, were often shipped in the faster Clipper ship which could make the trip from New York, Boston, etc. to San Francisco in about 120 days. Goods when they were shipped from the East coast (and Europe) were in shipload quantities when they arrived. This often suppressed the local market for that product and some goods would have to be auctioned off at low prices to pay for freight etc. with little or no profit. Very mixed cargo was typical of early shipments to minimize this problem. Food, liquors and building supplies nearly always be sold at a profit. Some business men thrived in this chaotic environment, many others lost their shirts.One of the first and urgent products needed was food and building supplies which could be bought and shipped from local Pacific ports to San Francisco, Sacramento, etc. Soon ships were going to and from Oregon, Hawaii, Mexico, Valparaso Chile, etc. to get food and building supplies that could be shipped back to San Francisco. San Francisco shipping boomed and wharves and piers had to be developed to handle the onslaught of cargo--Long Wharf was probably the most prominent.  Farmers, laborers, business men, prospective miners, gamblers, entertainers and prostitutes, etc. from around the world came to San Francisco.  The few Californio ranchers already living in California initially prospered as the sudden increase in the demand for meat drove up the price paid for livestock. Prices zoomed from the about $2.00 a hide to about $30.00-$40.00 per cow for meat they could get from hungry miners. Initially the Californios prospered. Later, these food shipments changed mainly to shipments from Oregon and internal shipments in California as agriculture was developed in both states. Taxes, mortgages, squatters and the cost of proving ownership of their enormous land holdings combined with droughts that seriously decreased the size of their herds led many of the about 500 Californio ranch owners to lose some or all of their enormous land holdings.Some of the goods that were imported by ship included liquor: absinthe, alcohol, ale, beer, whiskey, cognac, cider, champagne, wine, sherry, brandy, claret. Tools like shovels, picks and gold balances.  Consumables like cigars, cards, candles; clothing: boots, shoes, underwear; pants, shirts, etc. Fruit like bananas, oranges, and lemons. Food like molasses, flour, oysters, hams, barrels of salted meat, rice, coffee, tea, eggs (from Mexico); cheese, sugar, coffee, potatoes, onions, limes, coconuts, raisins, almonds. Lumber from Oregon and other parts of the U.S. and England (500,000 board feet of lumber and 500,000 bricks from England in one ships cargo). Building materials like nails, bricks, linseed oil, shingles, windows, stoves, lumber, etc.. Miscellaneous items like furniture, wagons, carts, fishing boats, steam engines, etc. Coal that was needed to power the steam ships. Livestock like hogs, cows, horses, sheep, chickens, etc. Completed knocked down houses both metal and wooden. Some ships carried mostly mail and passengers. Almost anything could eventually be bought at some price.San Francisco was designated the official of entry for all California ports where U.S. Customs (also called tariffs and valorem taxs) (averaging about 25%) were collected by the Collector of customs from all ships bearing foreign goods. The first Collector of customs was Edward H. Harrison appointed by General Kearny.  Shipping boomed from the average of about 25 vessels from 1825 to 1847(California Ships to 1774-1848. Seventy-five Years in San Francisco Appendix N http://www.sfgenealogy.com/sf/history/hb75yap6.htm Accessed 2 Apr 2011) to about 793 ships in 1849 and 803 ships in 1850.(Ship Arrivals in the Port of San Franciscohttp://www.maritimeheritage.org/inport/1849.htm Accessed 1 Apr 2011) All ships were inspected for what goods they carried to collect the appropriate customs. Passengers disembarking in San Francisco had one of the easier accesses to the gold country since they could from San Francisco take a paddle wheel steamer, after 1849, to Sacramento and several other towns.Starting in 1849 many of the ship crews jumped ship and headed for the gold fields when they reached port. Soon Francisco Bay had many hundreds of abandoned ships anchored off shore. The better ships were re-crewed and put back in the shipping and passenger business. Others were bought cheap and hauled up on the mud flats and used as ships, saloons, temporary stores, floating warehouses, homes and a number of other uses. Many of these re-purposed ships were partially destroyed in one of San Franciscos many fires and ended up as landfill to expand the available land. The population of San Francisco exploded from about 200 in 1846 to 36,000 in the 1852 California Census.(San Francisco Population 794-2000 http://www.sfgenealogy.com/sf/history/hgpop.htm Accessed 4 Apr 2011) Unfortunately, the 1850 U.S. Census of San Francisco was burned in one of its frequent fires.In San Francisco initially many people were housed in wooden houses, ships hauled up on the mud flats to serve as homes or businesses, wood framed canvas tents used for saloons, hotels and boarding houses as well as other flammable structures. Lighting and heat were provided by burning oil lamps or open fires. All these canvas and wood structures housing fires, lanterns and candles combined with a lot of drunken gamblers and miners led almost inevitably to many fires. Most of San Francisco burned down six times in six Great Fires between 1849 and 1852.(San Francisco fires 1849-1852 http://www.sfmuseum.org/hist1/fire.html Accessed 4 Apr 2011)California FisheriesNative FisheriesCalifornia has had an extensive fishery since it was discovered over 10,000 years ago. The Native American inhabitants of California, nearly all hunter-gatherers, harvested many types of fish and shellfish as a regular and often major component of their diet. Several varieties of salmon and Steelhead were one of the mainstays of the California Indians living in the Northwest coast of California. The natives moved along the rivers and across the seas using canoes they had made using fire and stone age tools out of large trees--usually redwood. Salmon spawned in most rivers in California sometime during the year and were a welcome addition to the diet of people living near almost all streams. Many tribes migrated to a given area during spawning runs to harvest the fish. Fish were caught with spears, harpoons, nets, traps (weirs), hooks and lines, seafood by hand and using specific plant toxins (soaproot, buckeye nuts, and wild cucumber root)( Fish toxinshttp://hearstmuseum.berkeley.edu/outreach/pdfs/teaching_kit.pdf Accessed 17 Jun 2011) to temporarily paralyze the fish so they would float to the surface where could easily be captured.  About the only early competitor for fish was the Bears who lived in California then and who also liked salmon. Like acorns, the other staple of the California Indian diet, salmon and other fish were usually smoked or sun dried and stored in woven baskets so they could not spoil and were available to eat nearly year round.The people and people used sewen plank canoes (Tomols) to travel across and fish in the seas between the Southwest California Coast and the Islands of California. Some of their chief catches were sardines (pilchards) who were mentioned several times by the early Spanish explorers. The sardines were caught primarily with some kind of net.The Native Americans in the Francisco Bay constructed the Shellmound and over 400 other shellmounds made up of inedible shellfish shells from millions of meals consumed at or near the shellmound sites. The size of these mounds indicate that they had to have accumulated over hundreds if not thousands of years and indicate a well used and stable resource.  The shells they threw aside from their catches of shellfish eventually covered some hundreds of thousands of square feet, sometimes tens of feet thick. Most of the shells are from oysters (lurida) which occurred in large oyster reefs throughout the Francisco Bay area. How they are harvested is unknown but may have been by hand or by using oyster rakes. Tule (acutus) canoes were often used for fishing, moving between shell beds, hunting and fishing sites in the Bay area and the extensive  San Joaquin River Delta.Modern FisheriesDuring the Spanish colonization and Mexican periods there are no known fisheries developed. Indeed they probably contracted as the people and people were enticed to move to the Missions of California and their movement and populations rapidly decreased.During the Gold Rush there were many new immigrants who were familiar with fishing. There was a large demand for fresh food including fresh fish and shellfish among the rapidly increasing California immigrants. In particular, the seamen from the Ligurian Coast of the Italian Riviera, sailing to the continent of America from the famous Port of Genova, had enjoyed a priviledge role as navigators in the Spanish Empires expansion in Pacific-America.  While many started as cabin boys at the age of six years, the mariners would jump ship and use their subsistance skills as fishermen for survival. Along the California Coast, many Azorean-Portuguese had already turned from whaling to fishing.  When they didnt get rich mining gold, the sea offered a bounty. But the Anglo-Argonauts, like Lewis and Clarke before them, may have preferred to eat dog meat instead of salmon.  From the village of Riva Trigoso, these sailors expanded their chain of fishing colonies to sell fresha fishie in towns at San Diego, San Pedro, Santa Barbara, Monterey, Santa Cruz, San Francisco, Stockton, Sausalito, Eureka to Alaska. They built their own small fishing boats and economy using the traditional lateen sail technology to feed a hungry nation. Some of the first modern fishermen in California were also Chinese sampans fishing for squid, abalone and fish on  Monterey Bay. The Chinese, who came from the coastal Canton region of South China Sea, were able to export roughly two hundred to eight hundred pounds of fresh fish to San Francisco every day or one hundred tons per year. They were soon joined by many Ligurians who shared cultural-interchange by using Chinese and Portuguese techniques for fishing the rocky coast for rock cod, salmon and other fisheries. The small Latin fishing communities expanded with the growth of Good Friday by making a living at fishing for the markets and supplying San Francisco packers. The Chinese then specialized in squid fishing at night for their Asian markets. In 1899, the sardine fishery collapsed in Italy, energizing the immigration to Americas fishing villages. At Black Diamond (now Pittsburg), Frank Booth ran a successful salmon cannery with the Sicilian settlement on the Sacramento River. At Monterey in 1902, he purchased a struggling cannery next to Fishermans Wharf, and began experimenting with the bays abundant sardines. Booth succeeded, owing to his preseverence and the critical contributions of two immigrant men. Knut Hovden was a Norwegian fisheries expert and engineer who designed a modern assembly line operation and much of the machinery for mass production. Pietro Ferrante was a fisherman whose early success on the Delta led to conflicts with the Genovese, resulting in his interest to relocate in Monterey where Booth needed a loyal fleet.  In 1905, Ferrante arrived with his brother-in-law Orazio Enea, quickly attracting their extended families from the inland Delta and Palermo, Italy areas.  The sardine canning industry steadily assumed control, displacing the competition of Asian and Genovese smaller catches for the fresh fish markets.  The ready cannery labor force included the families of fishermen.  Booths cannery of cousins led California fisheries into the industrial age.One of the more unusual developments in the exploitation of natural resources was the market for fresh eggs during the Gold Rush leading people to take small boats to the Islands to collect wild bird eggs. They sometimes collected up to 500,000 eggs in a year. The War is the name given to an 1863 armed conflict between rival egging companies on the Islands, 25 miles west of Francisco.thumb|right|300px|Early steam powered seine netterThe vessels first used were powered by wind and oars. Since modern fishing in California was developed after 1850 (at about the same time as steamships) there were soon some steam powered fishing vessels being used for longer distance fishing in bigger boats. The steam was used both for propulsion and also for winching in nets, unloading catches, lifting and lowering anchors etc. As the engines and engines (gasoline engine) were developed in the early 1900s they were soon the engine of choice.  engines are now the engine of choice for powering most commercial vessels. Their economical operation and long lifetimes make their higher initial cost normally well worthwhile. Today many smaller and sports boats are powered by an motor consisting of a self-contained unit that includes engine, gearbox and propeller or jet drive, designed to be affixed to the outside of the transom. The motor  provides steering control both as a movable rudder and by pivoting over their mountings to control the direction of thrust. Outboard motors have less than one horsepower to over 200 hp and are relatively easy to remove for service or replacement.Commercial fishing today uses a variety of techniques for fishing. rods with baited hooks and lines used in various ways are used for  fishing for some particular types of fish.  Fishing using nets like nets, nets, nets, gillnets, nets, nets, nets etc. of various sizes and construction as well as fishing with hundreds of hooks on a line fishing both for bottom and fish (near surface fish) are the most common devices used to catch high yields of fish. The fisheries uses crab pots baited with dead fish to catch crabs. Hauling Nets.jpg|thumb|right|300px|Double-rigged shrimp trawler hauling in the netsIn some parts of the Northwest, fishing with baited traps is also common. Common commercial methods for catching shrimp and prawns include trawling, nets, seines, baiting and dip netting. Bottom trawling often tears up the ocean bottom and can be very destructive to all bottom dwelling fish. Trawling involves the use of a system of nets deployed on or near the sea floor. Benthic trawling is towing or dragging a net at the very bottom of the ocean. Demersal trawling is towing a net just above the benthic zone. trawling (pelagic trawling) is trawling, or net fishing nearer the surface of the ocean. For some applications a trap is used. traps or weirs restricts the flow of fish so that they are directed into a trap. The fish stay alive until they are removed and these techniques can be used to free some types of fish that are preferentially not caught.  Today elaborate trawlers, etc. are all examples of the techniques used today. To keep the caught fish fresh they are often kept in refrigerated holds or packed in ice.As is typical worldwide of public owned resources, unlimited fishing has led to severe overfishing for some fisheries. In response to this quotas, catch limits, closed and open seasons and other regulations had to be set in place to control the who, when, how and where questions of fishing. In 1851California enacted a law concerning oysters and oyster beds. In 1852 the first regulation of salmon fishing occurred when weirs or stream fish obstructions were prohibited and closed seasons established. In 1870 California Board of Fish Commissioners , predecessor to the Department of Fish and Game was established. In 1870 the oyster (Crassostrea virginica) was introduced, in 1871 shad, in 1874 Catfish and in 1879 bass were all introduced to California waters.(New species introducedhttp://content.cdlib.org/view?docIdkt667nb1cg&brandcalisphere&doc.viewentire_text Accessed 15 Jun 2011) California has about 4,000 lakes and  of streams and canals suitable for game fish. To help fish get around dams ladders are constructed to allow them to pass on upstream for spawning etc. To preserve, protect and enhance existing fishing the Department of Fish and Game (DFG) tries to keep all fishing laws enforced. The 720 properties managed by the DFG are: 110 wildlife areas, 130 ecological reserves, 11 marine reserves, 159 public access areas, 21 fish hatcheries and 289 other types of properties.( California Fish and Gamehttp://www.ebudget.ca.gov/StateAgencyBudgets/3000/3600/infrastructure.html Accessed 20 Jun2011) To help keep California waters stocked with fish in 1870 the first California fish hatcheries were built--mostly trout hatcheries. Today (2011) there are eight salmon and steelhead hatcheries and 13 trout hatcheries. Though hatcheries may help some fishing stocks they are no panacea to counteract overfishing, habitat destruction, stream restrictions, water diversions, etc.( List of California fish hatcherieshttp://www.dfg.ca.gov/fish/Hatcheries/HatList.asp Accessed 17 Jun2011)In 1899 the first sardine cannery (San Francisco Bay) was built. Sardines, at this time, existed in large schools of millions of fish migrating each year up the California coast to spawn. The first factory was soon supplemented by about 40 more factories starting about 1902--most around California. On the Sacramento River, the Sicilians from Parlermos village of Isola Della Femina immigrants had established a chain of colonies using gill nets for the salmon fisheries. Baseball hall-of-fame slugger Joe DiMaggios family was from Martinez.  Fishing technology at Monterey at the time was archaic and inefficient; the canning process was equally crude. The unsightliness, odor, and processing waste from harbor canneries dictated that all future canneries would have to locate away from any business or residential district. A process was developed for reducing fish heads, tails, guts and skin into meal that could be processed into fertilizer and livestock feed. Reduction was cheap because it didnt require much labor, and the market for fishmeal was unlimited. Monterey became a cannery town. About 70% of all sardines were ground up and used as fertilizer and lifestock feed with only about 30% canned. The yield of sardines landed was about 500,000 tons in 1940 down to only 53 tons in 1953.( Sardine canneries in Californiahttp://www.ethicurean.com/2009/12/09/sardines/ accessed 15 Jun 2011) In 1940 sardines were the most valuable fishing stock in the state.  As the temperature of the ocean dropped the migrating sardine schools largely disappeared after 1950 from California waters and nearly all the canneries shut down. The ocean temperature has an irregular cycle called the Decadal Oscillation turned water temperatures colder in the mid-1940s, driving sardines southward and intensifying the pressures brought on by overfishing. As the ocean temperatures are cycling higher now there is some evidence that the sardines are starting to return. Today the Bay Aquarium, displaying many types of marine life, is located on the former site of a sardine cannery on Row off the Pacific Ocean shoreline in California. The Bay National Marine Sanctuary (MBNMS) is a U.S. Federally protected marine area offshore of Californias central coast around Bay.See: Bay National Marine Sanctuary link to get a list and links to other protected marine preserves in California.The major types of sport and commercial fish and shellfish now found in California waters are: Abalone, Tuna, Anchovy, Barracuda, Surfperch, Billfishes, Tuna, Bonito, Cabezone, Halibut, Carp, Catfish, Clams, Corbina, Crabs, Crappie, Croaker, Crab, Eels, Flounder, fish,  sea bass, Greenling, Groundfish (includes Rockfish species), Grouper, Grunion, Halibut, Hardhead, Herring, Hake, mackerel, Bass, Bass, Lingcod, Mackerel, Oysters, Pacific Shrimp, Perch, Pikeminnow (Squawfish), Prawn, Rock Crab, Sablefish, Blackfish, Salmon, Sardine, Scallops, Scorpionfish, Sharks, Sheephead, Skate, thornyhead, tuna, Bass, Smelts, Sole, Spider or Sheep Crab, Splittail, Lobster, Squid, Steelhead, Bass, Sturgeon, Surfperch, Swordfish, Turbot, Trout, Whitefish, (fish), (fish)( Major fish species in California watershttp://ca-seafood.ucdavis.edu/facts/species.htm Accessed 17 Jun 2011)( California fishes NOAAhttp://www.pfeg.noaa.gov/products/las/fish/short_names.html Accesssed 17 Jun 2011)See: NOAA Long list of California fish for more specific names:( NOAA Long list of California fishhttp://www.pfeg.noaa.gov/products/las/fish/lon_names.html Accessed 17 Jun2011)Nearly all fishing is subject to quotas, allowed seasons, licensing, allowed tackle, type and number of lines or net types, excluded (closed) areas, allowed size range, allowed catch size, and other restrictions. The jurisdictions and roles of several state and federal agencies often overlap in the maritime domain giving rise to an alphabet soup of agencies and jurisdictions. Each state normally maintains joint jurisdiction over the first  (3 nautical mile) of their coastal waters. The main agency charged with ensuring deep sea fishing regulations and restrictions in the United States Exclusion Zone (EEZ) of  (200 nautical miles) off its shores are enforced on the high seas by the States Coast Guard.  Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries Office for Law Enforcement patrol boat.jpg|thumb|right|300px|One of the NOAA OLEs few  patrol craft The Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) agency within the States Department of Commerce is charged with protecting and preserving the nations living marine resources through scientific research, fisheries management, enforcement and habitat conservation. The Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries Office for Law Enforcement tries to enforce the about 35 laws and regulations and regulations passed by Congress. NOAAs Office of Law Enforcement (OLE) is responsible for carrying out more than 35 federal statutes and regulations. The agencys jurisdiction spans more than s ocean in the U.S.s Exclusion Zone (EEZ) spread over more than  of U.S. coastline and the countrys 13 National Marine Sanctuaries and its Marine National Monuments. It and the States Coast Guard are also responsible for enforcing U.S. treaties and international law governing the high seas and international trade. With such a large coverage area, its no wonder that NOAAs Office of Law Enforcement operates joint enforcement agreements with 27 coastal states and partners with other agencies to help get the job done. Article III, Section 2 of the States Constitution grants original jurisdiction to federal courts over admiralty and maritime matters,  however that jurisdiction is not exclusive and most maritime cases can be heard in either state or federal courts under the saving to suitors clause.() Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries Office for Law Enforcement and NOAA Fisheries works within the laws as enacted in the Magnuson-Stevens Act, the Lacey Act Amendments of 1981, the Marine Mammal Protection Act, the National Marine Sanctuaries Act and the Species Act. NOAAs Office of Law Enforcement now has 146 special agents and 17 enforcement officers working out of six divisional offices and 52 field offices throughout the United States and U.S. territories. Many have criticized this meager manpower as grossly inadequate.(NOAAs Office of Law Enforcementhttp://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/ole/ole_about.html Accessed 29 Jun 2011) Overfishing is one of the main problems with many marine fisheries with about 30% of all marine fisheries thought to be over fished. Inadequate data is one of the main restrictions to finding and instituting reasonable and sustainable limits on many fishing stocks. To control overfishing NOAA has instituted the Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) to set quotas, specify open and closed fisheries and seasons and other limits on what, when and how fish are caught within federal guidelines. With the help of the six regional science centers, eight regional management councils,(NOAA FISHERIES: Councils) the coastal states and territories, and three interstate fisheries management commissions,(NOAA FISHERIES: Commissions) These councils have had varying amounts of success,( Fishing Councils succcess Rate http://www.conservefish.org/storage/marinefish3/documents/2009mfcnar.pdf Accessed 29 Jun 2011) but seem to at least have started the rehabilitation of some fisheries. States Fish and Wildlife Service National Fish Passage Program tries to remove barriers blocking the natural migration of fish to historic habitat used for reproduction and growth.(National Fish Passage Programhttp://www.fws.gov/fisheries/fwco/fishpassage/index.html Accessed 28 Jun 2011)  Since fisheries are the mainstay of some communities as well as being a $38 billion dollar industry there are many conflicting pressures on controlling fishing. More data gathered by more people on: bycatch (caught but unusable fish), fish life cycles, fish habitats at different parts of their life cycle, destructive fish harvesting methods, least damaging ways to harvest fish, etc. are needed to make reasonable choices and set quotas, seasons, etc. necessary to preserve our fisheries.  All of this should be set with a maximum of scientific and a minimum of political input. With todays increasingly efficient fishing techniques and fleets, necessary restrictions are the only thing that will assure a continuing source of fishing related jobs and fish products for our descendants--being responsible stewards of our natural resources is often a difficult job but one we can learn and implement.California Naval BasesMare Islandthumb|right|upright1.5|Aerial photo of the southern part of Mare IslandIsland, near the city of California, was first Naval Base in California. The Napa River forms its eastern side as it enters the Strait juncture with the east side of Pablo Bay. In 1850, Commodore Drake Sloat, in charge of a commission to find a California naval base, recommended the island across the Napa River from the settlement of Vallejo; it being free from ocean gales and from floods and freshets.On November 6, 1850, two months after California was admitted to statehood, President Fillmore reserved Mare Island for government use. The U.S. Navy Department acted favorably on Commodore Sloats recommendations and Mare Island was purchased in July, 1852, for the sum of $83,410 for the use as a naval shipyard. Two years later, on September 16, 1854, Mare Island became the first permanent U.S. naval installation on the west coast, with Commodore G. Farragut, as Mare Islands first base commander. For more than a century, Mare Island served as the States Navys Island Naval Shipyard.  A 508-foot (155 m) drydock was built by the Public Works Department on an excellent rock foundation of cut granite blocks. The work took nineteen years and was completed in 1891. During the War, a concrete drydock on wooden piles, 740 feet (230 m) long, was completed after eleven years of work, in 1910. By 1941, a third drydock had been completed and the drydock number four was under construction. The ammunitions depot and submarine repair base were modern, fireproof buildings. A million dollar, three-way vehicle causeway to Vallejo was completed.Before World War II, Mare Island had been in a continual state of upbuilding. By 1941, new projects included improvements to the central power plant, a new pattern storage building, a large foundry, machine shop, magazine building, paint shop, new administration building, and a huge storehouse. The yard was expected to be able to repair and paint six to eight large naval vessels at a time. Several finger piers had recentlywhen? been built, as well as a new shipbuilding wharf, adding one 500-foot (150 m) and a 750-foot (230 m) berth. It employed 5593 workers at the beginning of 1939, and rapidly increased to 18,500 busily engaged by May 1941, with a monthly payroll of $3,500,000(1941). Then came Harbor. In 1941, the drafting department had expanded to three buildings accommodating over 400 Naval architects, engineers and draftsmen. The hospital carried 584 bed patients. Mare Island became one of the Navys ship building sites in World War II specializing in building diesel engine powered submarines--they eventually built 32 of them. After the war was over Mare Island became a premier site for building Nuclear powered submarines--building 27 of them.In 1969, the US Navy transferred its (Vietnam War) Brown Water Navy Riverine Training Forces from Coronado, California, to Mare Island. Swift Boats (Patrol Craft Fast-PCF), and PBRs (Patrol Boat River), among other types of riverine craft, conducted boat operations through out the currently named Napa-Sonoma Marshes State Wildlife Area, which are located on the north and west portions of Mare Island. Mare Island Naval Base was deactivated during the 1995 cycle of US base closures, but the US Navy Reserves still have access to the water portions of the State Wildlife Area for any riverine warfare training being conducted from their new base in Sacramento, California.In 1996 Mare Island Naval Shipyard was closed.Naval Base San Diego.Base San Diego was started on land acquired in 1920. San Diego has become the home port of the largest naval fleet in the world, and includes two supercarriers, as well as Corps stations, U.S. Navy ports, and US Coast Guard installations. Naval Base San Diego is the largest base of the United States Navy on the west coast of the United States, in San Diego, California. Naval Base San Diego is the principal homeport of the Pacific Fleet, consisting of 54 ships and over 120 tenant commands. The base is composed of 13 piers stretched over 977 acres (3.95 km2) of land and 326 acres (1.32 km2) of water. The total on base population is 20,000 military personnel and 6,000 civilians.California Shipbuilding Mare Island Naval Shipyard off Mare Island in 1943.Image:Mariano G. Vallejo 0865836.jpg|thumb|right|300px|Polaris ballistic missile submarine USS Mariano G. VallejoIsland Naval Shipyard (MINS) in California was the premier naval construction site for Navy ships on the  Coast of the United States from about 1855 to 1993. Before War II, Mare Island had been in a continual state of upbuilding. By 1941, the yard was expected to be able to repair and paint six to eight large naval vessels at a time.  It employed 5593 workers at the beginning of 1939 which rapidly increased to 18,500 by May 1941, with a monthly payroll of $3,500,000(1941). Then came Harbor. During World War II Mare Island specialized in building up the US, Navys submarine forces in the Pacific as well as building other Naval ships.When Congress ordered Mare Island closed down in 1993, the shipyard employed 5,800 workers.(title  The History of Base Realignments and Closures | url  www.senate.state.tx.us/75r/senate/ commit/c650/downloads/Robles_brachistory.ppt)Island Naval Shipyard constructed at least eighty-nine sea-going vessels for the United States Navyincluding two for the Cutter Service. Among the more important ships & boats built were:Mare Island Construction*2 Wood sloop-of-war* 1 iron monitor* 1 revenue cutter (USRC)* 1 carrier* 1 harbor boat for the Cutter Service* 1 training ship* 1 collier* 1 carrier* 3 tankers* 2 gunboats* 19 destroyers* 15 chasers - wood* 1 cruiser* 1 cruiser* 2 battleships* 2  tenders* 32 Diesel powered submarines* 17  Nuclear-powered submarines* 1 Trieste IISee: Island Naval Shipyard (MINS) for specific ships. National Steel and Shipbuilding Company File:USNS Mercy leaving San Diego Bay.jpg|thumb|right|300px|ship Mercy leaving San Diego in May 2008.Steel and Shipbuilding Company, commonly referred to as NASSCO, is a shipyard in Diego, California, and a division of Dynamics. It is located next to the San Diego Naval base. What became NASSCO was founded as a small machine shop called California Iron Works (CIW) in 1905. The machine shop and foundry were renamed National Iron Works (NIW) in 1922 and moved to the San Diego waterfront to build ships in 1944-1945. In 1949 NIW was renamed National Steel and Shipbuilding Corporation (NASSCO). The shipyard specializes in maintaining and constructing commercial cargo ships and auxiliary vessels such as minesweepers and LSTs, ships, patrol craft, and cargo vessels for the Navy and the Sealift Command. It is the largest new construction shipyard on the West Coast of the United States employing more than 4,600 people and is now the only major ship construction yard on the West Coast of the United States.See: Ships Built in San Diego, California( Ships Built in San Diego California Ships built in San Diego, California Accessed 29 Jun 2011) for write ups on 70 ships built there. California Shipbuilding Corporation Image:RedOakVictory2010Aug19.jpg|thumb|right|300px|ship Red Oak Victory (AK-235), now a museum ship.Shipbuilding Corporation  (often called Calship) built 467 Liberty and ships during War II, including Haskell-class transports. The Calship shipyard was created at Island in Angeles, California, USA as part of the World War II shipbuilding effort.  It was initially 8 ways, and increased to 14.  After the war, it was liquidated. The ships they built were:* 306 EC2-S-C1 ship cargo transport* 30 Z-ET1-S-C3 Liberty ship tanker ** 32 VC2-S-AP3 ship cargo transport, 8,500 hp* 30 VC2-S-AP5 Haskell class USN transport* 69 VC2-S-AP2 Victory ship cargo transport, 6,000 hpKaiser Richmond shipyardsImage:SS John W Brown.jpg|thumb|right|300px|John W. Brown is one of only two surviving operational ships.Kaiser Ricmond Shipyards, California (a Kaiser facility) had  four Richmond Shipyards, located in the city of California States, were run by Metals and part of the Shipyards. They were responsible for constructing more ships during War II, 747, than any other shipyard in the United States. J. Kaisers company  had been building ships for the Maritime Commission in the late 1930s. When orders for ships from the government, already at war with Germany, allowed for growth, Kaiser established his first Richmond shipyard, beginning in December, 1940. They specialized in mass producing ships fast and efficiently and thats all they built:* 747 EC2-S-C1 ship cargo transportThese ships were completed in two-thirds the amount of time and at a quarter of the cost of the average of all other shipyards. The ship SS Robert E. Peary was assembled in less than five days as a part of a special competition among shipyards; but by 1944 it was only taking the astonishingly brief time of a little over two weeks to assemble a Liberty ship by standard methods. They pre-assembled major parts of the ship including the hull sections at various locations in the shipyard and then, when needed, moved them with heavy lift cranes to the shipyard launching site where they welded the pre-built sections together. After the ships were launched they were finished to their final configuration while afloat and the launch way was available to start building another ship.In 1945, the shipyards were shut down as fast as they had started up four years earlier. Much of the shoreline previously occupied by the shipyards is now owned by California and has been cleaned up and redeveloped under federally-assisted brownfields programs. The Rosie the Riveter/Home Front World War II National Historical Park was established on the shipyard site to commemorate and interpret the role of the WW II home front in winning World War II.* Richmond Shipyards Images(Richmond Shipyards Images Images and oral history transcripts describing the early days of the Richmond Shipyards Accessed 13 Jun 2011)* Kaiser Shipyards(Kaiser Shipyards Permanente Metals Corporation - Kaiser Richmond CA Shipyards 13 Jun 2011)California PortsCalifornia ShipwrecksThe Islands, Islands of California and the rocky mainland coast have historically provided hazardous navigational obstacles to shipping. Intermittent fogs and dangerous winds and storms often led ships to rocks, dangerous beaches and islands to be pounded by the Oceans Swell and storms. Fierce currents have always swept in and out of the entrance to the Golden Gate as the tide shifts direction. More than 140 shipwrecks have been reported in the waters of the of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary.One of the first recorded shipwrecks in California is that of the San Augustin, a richly laden Spanish galleon, which was driven ashore in a gale in 1595 in Bay, northwest of San Francisco.The Point Disaster was the largest peacetime loss of Navy ships. Honda Point, also called Point Pedernales, is located on the seacoast of what is now Air Force Base, California off Arguello on the coast in Barbara County, California.  On the evening of September 8, 1923, fourteen ships of Destroyer Squadron 11 were traveling at 20 knots (37 km/h) in formation while navigating by reckoning to find the entrance to the sometimes treacherous Barbara Channel. The squadron was led by Commodore H. Watson, on the flagship destroyer USS Delphy.  All were Clemson-class destroyers, less than five years old.  At 21:00 hours the ships turned east to course 095, supposedly heading into the entrance of Santa Barbara Channel.  Seven destroyers ran aground at Honda Point, a few miles from the northern side of the Barbara Channel. Two more destroyers sustained some damage. Twenty three men died.(Overshiner, Elwyn E.; Course 095 to Eternity: The Saga of Destroyer Squadron Eleven; Publisher: Overshiner; 1980; ISBN 9780937480007)The state of California keeps a Shipwrecks Database of all known California shipwrecks (1540 ea.) and their best known latitude and longitude coordinates, ship type, owner, Captain, etc.--when known.(http://shipwrecks.slc.ca.gov/ShipwrecksDatabase/Shipwrecks_Database.asp?frmIncrement20&frmStartRow20&frmQuery&holdSearchValueShipName&frmShip_S_Namx&frmOrderByship%27s+name&frmOrderDirectionASC California shipwreck list accessed 6 Jun 2011. To get a complete list of wrecks search database with a blank name field and copy results (20/page).) The definition of a shipwreck included in the database is rather broad including wrecks by running aground on a shore, rocks or reefs, ship explosions, foundering (filling with water and sinking), hitting snags (sunken trees), on board fires, parted lines, etc.--essentially anything that causes damage to the ship. Many of these ships were repaired and remained in service after their accidents. These ships, their cargoes, and the mooring systems which restrained them are the physical remains of the maritime history of California.California LighthousesA lighthouse is a tower, building, or other type of structure designed to contain a flashing light to warn of hazards or to aid navigation primarily at night. The lights now flash on and off in a predetermined sequence to identify which light they are. Lighthouses are used as an aid to nighttime or fog bound navigation for ship pilots and Captains at sea or on inland waterways. They warn of dangerous coastlines, points of land, hazardous shoals, rocks and reefs, or mark ship channels or harbor entrances. Under clear weather a light can be seen at night about . Now in areas of fog the lights are typically combined with a foghorn. Before foghorns were developed cannons and/or large bells (rung by clockworks) were used to warn of fog shrouded hazards. The flashing lights are usually mounted on towers or other prominent structures built on points of land, rocks or shoals near the sea. Some are built on pilings, Caissons or mounted on isolated rocks. Some light houses are mounted on anchored Lightships when no other economical alternative exists.In the 1850s the light was emitted from a system of oil or kerosene lamps. The light was concentrated and focused with a system of Fresnel lenses. In the 1850s the light was provided from a burning Wick in a oil lamp. Later, as kerosene became available, the light was provided by burning kerosene. They typically used a lamp which featured a hollow wick in a glass chimney for better, brighter, combustion with a silvered parabolic reflector behind the lamp to direct and intensify the light output. All oil fired lamps used burning wicks to make the lightgiving rise to one of the lighthouse keepers nickname as wickies as they spent a great deal of their time trimming the wicks on their lamps in order to keep them burning brightly with minimum sooting. In the 1850s their lights were rotated using clockworks, usually powered by falling weights attached to chains. Many lighthouses had vertical shafts in them so the weights could drop the height of the tower. This provided a longer time period before the weights would have to be pulled up again by the keepers to power the rotation mechanism. Some had to be rewound as often as every two hours.To keep the clockworks wound, refuel the oil needed to keep the light going and keep the lighthouse equipment and windows clean and maintained the lighthouses were typically manned with a keepers of from one to five men or women. Only the fortunate few lighthouses were located where the crews could live in comfort and/or socialize with others. Because these assignments were often in lonely fog bound locations the crews often rotated on and off duty every few months. Families sometimes were paid to run a lighthouse that way the husband, wife and children could keep together.Starting in the early 1890s the lights were provided by burning acetylene gas  generated situ from carbide reacting with water. The acetylene-gas illumination system could reliably be turned on and off automatically enabling automated unattended lighthouses to be used. Once electricity became available, often provided by one or more diesel generators in remote locations, the light source was gradually converted to electrical power and the clockworks were run by some type of electric motor. For example of modern changes, the Light  in Massachusetts (near the elbow of Cod) the light was converted in 1969 from its Fresnel lens light assembly to a & Finch DCB-224 rotating light generating over 2.8 million candela. This is visible for over 20 nautical miles on a clear night and has a self changing bulb assembly to replace burned out bulbs.Once widely used, the number of operational lighthouses has declined due to the expense of maintenance and their replacement by modern electronic navigational aids. Nearly all lighthouses today, that are still being used, are automated to the extent possible with power often provided via solar cells and large batteries in inaccessible areas. Todays lighthouses are all run by the Coast Guard the successor to States Lighthouse Service. The list of active light houses, lighted beacons, etc. that provide detailed information on aids to navigation with their locations and characteristic signals is currently maintained by the Coast Guard in its List issued each year.(Light List 2011 http://www.navcen.uscg.gov/pdf/lightLists/LightList%20V6.pdf accessed 3 June 2011) California is presently in Eleventh and Thirteenth Coast Guard district.While the Spanish were in California their shipping was seldom more than ~2.5 ships/Year and they almost never had any way to predict when ships would show up and communication was so slow and uncertain that there was seldom any need for something like lighthouses. When nighttime signals were thought appropriate large fire might be built on the beach. Essentially there was no nighttime navigationit was too hazardous. During nighttime ships kept well off shore till daylight or anchored. Things only improved slightly when Mexico controlled California as the shipping increased to about 25 ships/yearstill too few to make lighthouses or even signal fires almost ever needed.  Ships still kept well off shore till daylight or anchored.When the Gold Rush started and the number of ships per year jumped to over 700 ships per year and lighthouse technology had advanced far enough, mainly through the introduction of the Fresnel lens and lamps, lighthouses started to become much more useful and feasible. Several bad wrecks showed that there were many hazards to navigation that needed to be marked at night or in fog. Since from 1790 till well after 1850 the U.S. Federal Government was over 85% financed by import tariffs (also called customs duties or Ad-valorem taxes) on imported foreign goods of about 25% there was already a steady flow of money collected from California shipping going to Washington. Since all tariffs were paid by foreign goods shipped into the United States since 1790 by the Revenue Marine (predecessor of the Coast Guard) closely monitored ship traffic. Tariffs collected by the Collector of Customs who was charged with inspecting each ship that came into port and collecting the appropriate tariff tax. The first Collector of Customs in California was Edward H. Harrison appointed by General Kearny in 1848. To get some of this revenue flowing back to California, California congressmen started petitioning for lighthouses and Congress soon agreed. By 1850 the East Coast already had a fairly extensive array of light houses so the same technology, developed over decades of use, was transferred to the Coast of the United States.The firm of Francis A. Gibbons and Francis Kelly was awarded the contract to build Californias first seven lighthouses in 1853. The lighthouse on Island was the first built and was in operation in the Francisco Bay on Island by 1855completion was delayed because of the shortage of Fresnel lenses. Over time more than 45 lighthouses were eventually built along the California coast.right|thumb|left|200px|Point Reyes LighthouseDespite the efforts of the brave men and women who were stationed at the Point Reyes lighthouse, ships continued to wreck on the  nearby coast. The Saving Service opened the first of two Life Saving Stations built at Point Reyes in 1889. The second station, at Drakes Beach, closed in 1968. The workers stationed there attempted the rescue of victims of storms and shipwrecks. The incredible danger of their job and the dedication they have to their jobs can be sensed in the Coast Guards unofficial motto,:You have to go out, but you dont have to come back in.See also* of California to 1899* of California* California explorers* of A Ligurian Fishing Colony www.rivatrigoso.com/street/approfondimenti.asp* Bay* expeditions to the Pacific Northwest* coast lumber trade* history of the United StatesReferences*Hiplito (Hypolite) Bouchard and the Raid of 1818*Lamermoore*Shipwreck database*Maritime History of Point Reyes*Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary*The Lighthouses of California*This article contains text from the Park Service, which is in the domainExternal links* * Abandoned Shipwreck Act Guidelines at nps.gov* Maritime Museum of San Diego at sdmaritime.com*The Newport Harbor Nautical Museum
3729661
Metropolis_Building
 references            The Metropolis Building or Edificio Metrpolis (Spanish) is an office building in Madrid, Spain, at the corner of the de Alcal and Va. Inaugurated in 1911, it was designed by Jules and Raymond Fvrier for the insurance company La Unin y el Fnix. It is currently owned by Metrpolis Seguros.History Start of construction  After La Unin y el Fnix acquired the ground in 1905, they launched an international competition for the opportunity to design their building.(Mentioned on sign on the building..) Among French and Spanish architects, Jules and Raymond Fvrier won, and construction started in 1907.( For its construction, five homes had to be demolished between two streets: Calle de Alcal and Calle del Caballero de Gracia. At that time, the Gran Via was still in design phase.(In 1910 construction was finished, and on 21 January 1911 the building was inaugurated. New owners In 1972 Metrpolis Seguros acquired the building, and the previous owner decided to take the original statue, by then very familiar in Madrids skyline, to their new headquarters.The original statue on top of the building depicted the mythological Phoenix and Ganymede sitting on its wing. It is currently on display in the gardens around the Madrilea building, Paseo de la Castellana nr 33. Restoration Metrpolis Seguros put a great deal of effort restoring the building. They understood that it was one of Madrids landmarks and should be maintained. This went in a few steps but works started right after Metrpolis Seguros bought the building.In 1988 the facade was fully cleaned, together with the roof, basements and central courtyard. In November 1995 the delicate task of restoring the windows of the main staircase were done by the original artists, Maurnejean Vidrieras Artisticas and Antonio Herraiz, SA, retaining their original appearance.(End of 1996 the most important work was carried out, which restored the entire facade, with focus on the sculptures which were heavily damaged by environmental pollution and pigeons.(Original statue, symbol of La Unin y el Fenix|thumbArchitectureJules and Raymond Fvrier gave the building a French, Beaux-Arts style, which was quite unusual at the time.(The ground level is topped by ornate colonnaded upper floors. The columns support 4 statues representing Mining, Agriculture, Industry and Commerce, made by Saint Marceaux and L. Lambert. At the foot of the dome youll find a statue sculpted by D. Mariano Benlliure.The rounded tower is covered with 30000 leaves of 24 Carat gold.(LocationIt is commonly assumed Va starts at the Edificio Metrpolis. However, its real address is Calle de Alcal 39. The first building at the beginning of Gran Va is the Grassy. Gallery Image:EdMetropolisMadrid.JPGFile:Edificio Metrpolis (Madrid) 20.jpgFile:Edificio Metrpolis (Madrid) 18.jpgFile:Edificio Metrpolis (Madrid) 17.jpgReferencesExternal links* Official Metrpolis Seguros website (Spanish)* Image 1 of the Metropolis Building* Image 2 of the Metropolis Building* Metropolis Building at Nightde:Metropolis-HausMetrpolisMetrpolis
3737521
University_College_Falmouth
 website          http://www.falmouth.ac.ukUniversity College Falmouth is a British college in Cornwall. Founded in 1902, it had previously been the Falmouth School of Art and then Falmouth College of Arts until it received taught degree-awarding powers (and the right to use the title University College) in March 2005.() In April 2008, University College Falmouth merged with College of Arts, adding a range of Performance courses to its portfolio.() This merger had been the subject of dispute by some supporters of Dartington.() The University College is located in Penryn and Falmouth. Campus, in Penryn, is the larger of its two campuses, which it shares in a unique partnership with the of Exeter. The Woodlane Campus is in Falmouth town centre and provides a historic contrast to the modernity of Tremough.The University College is a partner in the Universities in Cornwall initiative.Historythumb|View of the RCPS building designed by George Wightwick.University College Falmouth was founded as Falmouth School of Art in 1902, in response to the diminution of scientific activities in Cornwall that was brought about by the decline of the Cornish mining industry.Falmouth School of Artupright|thumb|left|Entrance to the original Falmouth School of Art building in Arwenack AvenueIn 1902, Falmouth School of Art was a wholly private venture and offered classes such as Freehand Drawing, Model Drawing, Painting from Still Life, Drawing from the Antique, Drawing in Light & Shade, and Memory Drawing of Plant Form. Students were charged between four and ten shillings per session for the privilege, and were offered the opportunity to enter for Board of Education exams.In 1938, the Education Authority (LEA) took over the administration of the institution. In the 1940s, courses became the responsibility of the Head of Truro School of Art, Stanley Wright was appointed Principal, the School was recognized by the Ministry of Education and began to plan ambitious expansion. At this time there were six full-time members of teaching staff responsible for 21 full-time students, 55 part-time day students and 104 part-time evening students. Students were offered the option of studying either Art or Craft.  Art, by definition, covered fine Art, drawing and painting, museum study, and modelling and casting in clay. Craft included Leather, Weaving, Bookbinding, Printing and Inlay.In the 1950s, the College relocated from Arwenack Avenue to Kerris Vean in Woodlane (built in 1875), Jack Chalker was appointed Principal and courses for the Ministry of Educations Intermediate and National Diploma in Design Examinations were offered for the first time. Studios for sculpture and printed textiles were constructed in the grounds. The School now occupied a unique site in the former Fox-Rosehill sub-tropical gardens (which rivalled many others of great renown, such as Glendurgan and Trebah), Michael Finn was appointed Principal, the School began a commercial design course for vocational students as well as a junior design course for school children, and the National Advisory Council for Art Education (NACAE) was established.In the 1960s, the NACAE published its first report, Lanyon and Frost were appointed as visiting lecturers, a further storey was added to the textiles and sculpture workshops for use as a printmaking studio, and alterations to Kerris Vean presented opportunities for the study of photography. The question for Falmouth at this time was whether an art school with only 120 students, situated in a remote and economically disadvantaged part of the country, could compete for recognition with much larger institutions, against a national backdrop of changing approaches to art education. The LEA and leading artists such as Barbara Hepworth, Wynter and Heron were both generous with, and energetic in, their support of the School. The next dilemma for the School was whether it should seek the NACAEs authorization to offer the new Diploma in Art & Design (equivalent to a degree), and at that point, it decided to focus on full-time Intermediate and National Diploma students, and relinquish both its commercial design course and some part-time classes. With the purchase of Woodlanes Rosehill House (built by Robert Were Fox in 1820) in the offing, it had seemed certain that the School would successfully achieve the recognition that it so earnestly sought, but having underestimated the NACAEs basic requirements for general accommodation, studio space and staffing, and having failed to convince the Council that such a small institution could survive, it was with regret that the School received the news that the NACAE had refused its application. Undaunted, the search for additional land commenced. Encouragement came to try again from Dame Hepworth, Leach, Heron and Wynter in 1964. In 1965, the momentous day arrived when the NACAE overturned its earlier verdict, following a reassessment of the School by the Chairman and Vice Chancellor of the NACAE, and the Principal of the College of Art (RCA). The School was now recognized as a centre for the Diploma in Art & Design, with Painting as a main course. Recognition for sculpture was to follow shortly. There were now 40 full-time students at the School, with a remit to expand to at least 100 students, but such expansion could only come about with a major building programme and the purchase of yet more land.In the mid-1960s, additional studios and technical workshops were added to the Schools estate, and the LEA acquired Rosehill House on its behalf. Of great architectural merit, this building became the centre for Complementary Studies with History of Art, and the Library. Additional land was then purchased at the southernmost boundary of the Woodlane site to enable the enlargement of the painting studios and to provide a cinema, canteen, common room and games room. At this time, the School offered a pre-diploma (the precursor of our modern-day Foundation programme), a Diploma in Art & Design (DipAD) which superseded the National Design Diploma (NDD), and entrance examinations for postgraduate art and design institutions such as the RCA and the Slade. Design became an important aspect of the Schools curricula, with Patrick Heron teaching two-dimensional design, and Dame Barbara Hepworth and Bernard Leach teaching three-dimensional design. Photography appeared in the Colleges academic portfolio for the first time in 1963. The number of teaching staff at the School had risen from six in the 1940s to 25 in the 1960s.In the 1970s, the School acquired an hotel opposite the Woodlane site and converted it into an hostel for 21 students, John Barnicoat was appointed Principal, and the School was recognized by the for National Academic Awards (CNAA) as a centre for a three-year programme of study leading to the award of a BA(Hons) degree in Fine Art. In 1976, Cross was appointed Principal and the School continued to develop its resources by improving its sculpture studios and creating a new studio for ceramic sculpture. A purpose-built facility for photography and film was added, the library was enlarged, and the acquisition of a further student hostel in Woodlane, at Lamorva House, enabled the School to offer accommodation to 57 students. In addition, the original Arwenack Art School was handed back to the School to serve its introductory Foundation course as a centre for three-dimensional studies.In the 1980s, BA(Hons) Fine Art was the principal academic course. A two-year BTEC General Art & Design course was added to the Schools portfolio and additional facilities for printmaking, photography, textiles and fashion were then created in buildings adjacent to the School in Woodlane. At this point, the School had a population of approximately 200 students on both HE and FE courses.Reorganisation of art education in CornwallBy 1984, the School was under threat of closure from the National Advisory Board (NAB) on the grounds that its Fine Art degree course was academically and geographically isolated. The National Advisory Body (NAB) was set up to rationalise fine art provision in Britain in line with prime minister Margaret Thatchers belief that art education should return to its 19th-century role of providing designers for industry. The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Schools Board of Governors, the acting Principal, Ian Carrick, the acting deputy for the Principal, Charles Hancock and Heron, quickly implemented the Schools only available strategy for survival and galvanized the support of local MPs, renowned artists, former students and friends of the School. The response received was overwhelming and an extraordinary number of individuals wrote to the NAB in support of the School from both within the County and outside it.Research conducted by NAB itself found that graduates from Fine Art courses headed the league tables for gaining employment in arts related fields after finishing their degrees. The NAB subsequently withdrew its threat of closure and agreed that it would turn its attention to reviewing Cornwalls art and design provision in its entirety instead.Historically there had been no overall LEA policy for art and design education in Cornwall beyond an accepted notion that Fine Art should be taught at Falmouth School of Art and applied Art at College, and it had been observed on several occasions that this anomaly presented the greatest impediment to the development of a real centre of excellence for art and design education in Cornwall.As a result, a joint working party involving senior specialist staff from both institutions was formed by the LEA to consider the future development of art and design in the County.In 1978, Cornwall College, a predominantly FE orientated institution, had formed a Faculty of Art & Design. It offered full-time, three- and four-year vocational courses in Design, Technical Illustration, Display & Exhibition Design, and Ceramics to 150 students, leading to the award of South West Region Diplomas in Design and Licentiateship to the Society of Designers. In the early 1980s, these courses were converted to BTEC National Diploma (ND) and Higher National Diploma (HND) courses. A one-year Foundation Design course was also in operation and in 1982, the CNAA validated the Facultys Postgraduate Diploma in Radio Journalism. By 1986, the student population of this Faculty had risen to around 500 Full-Time Equivalents (FTEs). The Faculty had significantly outgrown its resources at Cornwall Colleges main campus and there were no residential facilities for the increasing number of students that it recruited nationally.In 1987, it was agreed by County Council, and endorsed by the Secretary of State for Education, that Falmouth School of Art and Cornwall Colleges Faculty of Art & Design would merge to become Falmouth School of Art & Design. This new institution would be located at the Woodlane Campus in Falmouth.The portfolio of courses to be offered by the new institution to the combined population of 636 full-time students included: BA(Hons) Fine Art, BA(Hons) Scientific & Technical Graphics, PgDip Radio Journalism, BTEC ND and HND Graphic Design, BTEC ND and HND Technical Illustration, BTEC HND Ceramics, BTEC ND Design, BTEC ND General Art & Design and a Foundation course.In the same year, the first phase of new building work to provide accommodation for BA(Hons) Scientific & Technical Graphics commenced at Woodlane, the newly-formed Board of Governors for Falmouth School of Art & Design appointed Professor Alan Livingston as Principal, and a structure comprising eight Study Areas led by Principal Lecturers was agreed. As a result of the Reform Act 1988, the School became an independent Higher Education Corporation in April 1989.Falmouth College of ArtsThe 1990s witnessed the rapid development of the Colleges academic portfolio. Falmouth School of Art & Design became Falmouth College of Arts to signify its recognition of media as an arts subject. From 1992 the Colleges awards were accredited by the of Plymouth. By 1996 the student population included 906 full-time and 60 part-time undergraduates, 38 full-time and 68 part-time postgraduates, and 290 FE students.In 199899, the College was the only HE institution in the UK to be awarded 24 out of 24 for its teaching of art and design at undergraduate and postgraduate level by the Assurance Agency (QAA). The College also acquired its second campus at Tremough, an 18th Century, grade II listed country house and  estate in the nearby town of Penryn.University College FalmouthThe University Colleges new Design Centre opened at Tremough in the Autumn of 2003 as part of a 50 million development of the Tremough Campus under the Universities in Cornwall initiative, including social facilities, additional teaching accommodation and a Learning Resource Centre.Under the auspices of the CUC, the of Exeters operations in Cornwall transferred to Tremough in 2004, as this campus has been designated the Hub of the CUC (with Cornwalls FE Colleges forming the Rim). In April 2008, University College Falmouth merged with Dartington College of Arts, adding a range of Performance courses to its portfolio.(). In October 2010, the University College opened its new Performance Centre, which combines teaching facilities with spaces for public performances.University College Falmouth offers a Foundation Diploma in Art & Design.Undergraduate Courses at University College Falmouth include: BA(Hons) Advertising, Creative Events Management, Fine Art, Illustration, Marine & Natural History Photography, Photography, Press & Editorial Photography, Fashion Photography, Contemporary Crafts, Fashion Design, Graphic Design, Interior Design, Performance Sportswear Design, Textile Design, 3D Design, Digital Animation, Drawing, Digital Media, Radio Production (FdA), English, Creative Writing, English with Creative Writing, English with Media Studies, Film, Journalism, Public Relations, Dance, Choreography, Music, Creative Music Technology, Popular Music, Theatre and Music Theatre.()Postgraduate Courses include: MA Art & Environment, Creative Advertising, Curatorial Practice, Fine Art: Contemporary Practice, Illustration: Authorial Practice, International Journalism, Multimedia Broadcast Journalism, Writing, Professional Writing (including a part-time distance learning option), and Television Production.()Career & Professional Development Courses, Short Courses and Summer Schools include: Business Writing, Writing Creative Marketing Copy, Writing for Radio, an Introduction to Professional Writing, Professional Media Practice and courses delivered with the American online short course provider, Mediabistro.()Open Education: University College Falmouth launched the specialist Art, Design, Media & Performance open education repository, openSpace, in April 2010. Funded by a 20,000 grant from the Higher Education Academy, and project managed by JISC, the pilot project released 40 M-level credits from the MA Professional Writing course. The units, made available to the public through a Creative Commons license, are free to use, access and study. A full Screenwriting Unit is freely available to study online.  Other units include intoductory units to: Novel Writing, Fiction Writing, Non-Fiction Writing, Writing for Children, Business Writing and Feature Writing. ()CampusesWoodlane CampusWoodlane Campus is situated less than half a mile from the original Falmouth School of Art and is close to the two Foundation Studies studios.  Woodlane is home to BA(Hons)Fashion Design, Fine Art, Graphic Design, Illustration, Performance Sportswear Design and Public Relations, and provides facilities for MA Creative Advertising and MA Illustration: Authorial Practice. Since, 2002, the original school of art building has provided dedicated studios for MA Fine Art: Contemporary Practice.Tremough CampusTremough Campus is used and managed jointly by University College Falmouth and the University of Exeter in Cornwall.  Tremough is the hub of the Combined Universities in Cornwall project. Over 105 million of European and other funding has been invested in Phase One and Two of Tremoughs development. Current projects on site include further student accommodation, sports facilities and AIR, the Academy for Innovation and Research. Construction is also underway on The Exchange, a 10m joint project between Falmouth and Exeter to provide fantastic study spaces and facilities as an extension of the Library at Tremough.Academic rankingUniversity College Falmouth came 46th in The Guardian Good University Guide 2012, making it the highest ranked University College (excluding Colleges within the University of London) in the UK. The University College also appeared in the Top 20 for Art & Design.Student UnionThe Student Union, FXU, is the representative body of the students of University College Falmouth and the University of Exeter, Cornwall Campus, on the campuses of Tremough and Woodlane.  FXU organises events for students throughout the year such, facilitates community action and volunteering, provides opportunity for sporting involvement and offers student welfare advice.Notable alumni* Baldini, newsreader and presenter* Botfield, newsreader* Dean, artist* Dhaliwal, artist* Dunkley, TV presenter* Dyer (painter)* Fuller, actress* Garfors, CEO and president* Locke, artist* Long, news presenter* McGowan (artist)* ODonnell (artist), artist* Salmon, artist* Shaw, sculptor* Tremlett, artist* Umerle, artist* Woodward, novelist and poetReferencesExternal links* University College Falmouth  official website* Combined Universities in Cornwall* FXU Student Union 
3745804
Placer_gold
#REDIRECT mining
3753646
Hillsborough_Resources
 intl              Hillsborough Resources Limited is a coal mining company that operates the Quinsam underground thermal coal mine near Campbell River, Columbia serving the local and west-coast U.S. cement industry, and the Crossville underground coal mine in Tennessee, U.S. serving the regional power utility and industrial markets.  It also is developing substantial metallurgical coal properties near Ridge in the Northeast of British Columbia. In addition, Hillsborough owns and operates the Middle Point Barge Loading Facility located on Island, Canada. Its headquarters are in Vancouver, Canada. References 
3762139
Weir_Group
 homepage  www.weir.co.ukThe Weir Group plc () is an engineering company headquartered in Kilbride, Scotland. It is listed on the Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the 100 Index.HistoryFile:G_%26_J_Weir_Ltd_advertisement_Brasseys_1923.jpeg|thumb|left|Advertisement for G. & J. Weir Ltd. in the Naval Annual of 1923.  The Company was established in 1871 as a pump manufacturing business, G. & J. Weir Ltd..(Weir Group: Fact Sheet) These pumps became extremely well known for their use as feedwater pumps, and for ships auxiliary equipment such as evaporators.Under W G Weir, the company turned to producing munitions and war materiel in the First World War. As well as shells, they manufactured aircraft including the Aircraft Factory F.E.2 fighter and bomber.George Weir (aviator, son of Galloway Weir) a director of the company formed the Autogiro Company. G & J Weir would be a financial supporter of the company for several years. In 1943, they provided the finances for the construction of the W.9, an experimental helicopter, to Air Ministry requirements.   It was first listed on the Stock Exchange in 1947.( Double-acting Weir steam pumps were virtually standard fitment on British-built steamships, being used for pumping water, fuel, air and much else well into the 1950s, as well as being used on other ships worldwide.21st centuryIn July 2005, the Company sold its desalination and water treatment businesses, (Weir Westgarth, Weir Entropie and Weir Envig) to Veolia Water Systems, part of Veolia Water, the water division of Environnement: Weir Westgarth had been a pioneer of the flash distillation process used predominately to produce desalinated water from seawater.(Weir Group to sell water treatment businesses to Veolia)The Company bought Pompe Gabbioneta, an Italian pump manufacturer for 69m in 2005.(Weir splashes out in oil takeover)In May 2007, the Company sold its Glasgow-based business Weir Pumps to McColls Clyde Blowers plc, with the pump company subsequently being renamed to Clyde Pumps Ltd.(Former apprentice buys Weir Pumps)In November, 2010, Company announced acquisition of American Hydro Corporation, which makes turbines for hydro-electric power stations.()In December 2010, Weir was fined three million pounds over Saddam sanctions breaches.  Judge Lord Carloway from The High Court in Edinburgh confiscated 13.9m of illegal profits from Weir in this venture.()OperationsThe company is structured into three divisions:(Weir Group: Divisions)* Weir Minerals - manufactures slurry pumps, valves, hydrocyclones and mill lining systems for the mining and mineral processing industries* Power & Industrial - manufactures pumps and fluid handling systems and provides critical control and isolation solutions for the power generation industry* Oil & Gas - maufactures pumps, valves and engineering support for the oil and gas industriesReferencesExternal links* Official site
3771553
Cachoeira
Cachoeira (Portuguese, meaning the waterfall), is an inland town of Bahia, Brazil, on the River. The town exports sugar, cotton and tobacco and is a thriving commercial and industrial centre.First settled by the Indians, it was later settled by the Portuguese families of Dias Adorno and Rodrigues Martins. It became known as Nossa Senhora do Rosrio in 1674. It was a strategic area and was linked with the mining city of Salvador, the former colonial capital. It became a parish on December 27, 1693. It also became Vila de Nossa Senhora do Rosrio do Porto da Cachoeira do Paraguau in 1698.Sugar cane farming, gold mining on das Contas, increased traffic on royal streets, and navigation on the Rio Paraguau combined to boost the regional economy in the beginning of the 18th century.  In the beginning of 1800, the Cachoeirense society became very important politically.  It actively participated in the war of the of Bahia.The town became a city under the imperial decree of March 13, 1873 (Provincial Law 43).Cachoeira is considered a national monument of the Instituto do Patrimnio Histrico Artstico e Nacional (IPHAN)It is currently undergoing a bit of a tourist revival, and is a centre of candombl.Population historyReferencesThis article incorporates a translation from the Portuguese WikipediaExternal links* http://www.citybrazil.com.br/ba/cachoeira/* iCachoeira.com* Hotels in Bahia* Brazilian Touristic Portal Gallery File:Nineteenth-Century Facade in Cachoeira - Bahia - Brazil.JPG|Nineteenth-Century Facade File:Igreja da Ordem Terceiro do Carmo - Cachoeira - Bahia - Brazil.JPG|Church of the Third Order of Carmel File:Interior of Pousada do Convento do Carmo - Cachoeira - Bahia - Brazil.JPG|Carmel InnFile:Building Facades - Cachoeira - Bahia - Brazil.JPG|Building Facadesde:Cachoeiraes:Cachoeira(Bahia)bpy:it:Cachoeiramg:Cachoeira(Bahia)no:Cachoeirapl:Cachoeira(Bahia)ro:Cachoeira()vo:Cachoeirawar:Cachoeira
3781782
Slnic
Slnic () is one of the 14 towns of County, Romania, historically and currently known as a salt extraction center, as well as a town, with lakes. Two villages, Groani and Prjani, are administered by the town. Etymology As its name (salt in Slavonic) suggests, most of Slnics history and economy are directly related to the presence of relatively large quantities of salt underground, and even in open air.Slnic is also the name of the creek flowing through the town, tributary of River, which in turns is a tributary of River.Although technically incorrect, the compounded name Slnic Prahova is also being used, especially in other parts of Romania. This alternative name was probably generated to help discern between Slnic and another Romanian town, Slnic-Moldova. Tourism Image:Grota_miresii_slanic_RO.jpg|thumb|right|200px|The collapsed Brides Cave (Miresei)The town is famous for its salt lakes (or Bi): The Shepherds (Baciului), The Green (Verde) and The Red (Roie) Lakes, as well as for the Old (Veche) and New (Nou) Salt Mines.  While salt is still being extracted from the New Salt Mine, the Old Mine is open to the public now, being used as a spa, amusement center and museum of the salt mining industry. International contests of Model Aircraft Flying (Modellism) take place annually in the upper level (Mina Mihai) of the Old Mine.Other worthwhile tourist objectives, all within easy reach for any untrained hiker, are a local water spring named The Cold Fountain (Rece), the TV Relay Tower (Releu) beyond The Fir Forest (de Brazi), Beacons Hill (cu Semn), The Salt Mountain (de Sare) with the legendary Brides Cave (Miresei), now partially collapsed due to rain erosion, as well as The Green Rock (Verde) and The Colts Small Hill (Mnzului). External links *  Memoirs de la Mine by Sabina Ispas. (Map of region, pictures, brief history of the town)* Tourism Slanic Prahova (Great pictures taken underground, in the Old Salt Mine)* History of Jewish communities worldwide. (Brief description of the town, some historic data)* despre Slanic (Pictures and some information on towns history/economy/tourism - text in Romanian* Romanian Modellism Federation (Results of the 2006 Edition of the World Championship of Indoor Aircraft, Slanic, Romania)* International Aeronautic Federation (Program of the 2006 Edition of the World Championship of Indoor Aircraft - Slanic, Romania)(Prahova)(Prahova)(Prahova)hu:Slnicpl:Slnicpt:Slnicro:Slnictg:
3788213
Sudbury_Secondary_School
Sudbury Secondary School is a school in the downtown of Sudbury, Ontario, Canada, well known for its Arts Education Program, featuring theatre arts, dance, vocal music, instrumental music, keyboard, media arts and visual art. Sudbury Secondary School produces a mainstage musical each year (usually in the fall), as well as various other plays, concerts, art exhibits, and dance shows throughout the year.  Sudbury Secondary Schools F.W. Sheridan Auditorium also plays host to many performances by various organizations, groups, and out-of-town experiences.The school is overseen by the District School Board.  In December, 2007, the School Boards Administrative Council recommended that the school undergo a renewal project.  Items recommended for renewal: reducing excess space in the school; more parking for staff, students and visitors; that the guidance office be moved closer to the main office; that the school should become more environmentally friendly; potential movement of the arts departments so that they are closer to each other and to the auditorium, etc.  There are also many alterations suggested for the Sheridan Auditorium, such as adding change rooms, and putting in new seats. It is Sudburys historical high school, with many of its original components still intact. A large marble sign that was placed above the entrance to the first building can still be seen in the courtyard on the schools grounds. Arts Education The school offers an Arts Education magnet program.  Students who are in an arts program have one or more periods each day to develop skills in their field, whether it be dance, theatre arts, vocal music, instrumental music, keyboard, guitar, film or visual arts (fashion, photography, sculpting, etc).  Students are also required to complete the regular academic curriculum (Math, English, Science and French Immersion). Performing opportunities include the annual fall musical, recitals, festivals, and competitions. Centennial In 2008, Sudbury Secondary School celebrated its 100th anniversary.  A reunion was scheduled for the Civic Holiday weekend, with all former students invited to join.  The school, located at 153 College Street, has housed several different educational institutions, including Sudbury Mining and Technical School, Sudbury High School, Sheridan Technical School and the current Sudbury Secondary School. Famous Guests During the 1970s Sudbury Secondary High School hosted several famous art personalities.  These guest speakers gave information on their careers and life and generously answered questions to not only Sudbury Secondary High School students but to others who were bused in from neighbouring high schools for the events.  They included such people as artist Colville, and actress De Carlo most famous at the time as TVs Lilly Munster. Notable alumni Prominent alumni include:* Adetuyi, movie writer and director (the Yard)* Adetuyi, producer (Chicago)* Adetuyi, producer (Jozi-H)* Adetuyi, producer (Chicago)* Baumann, three-time Olympic gold medalist in swimming* Bowen, sports announcer for the Maple Leafs* Brunt, Idol competitor in 2005* Connor, sports journalist* Pedro Costa, Canadian Singer/Songwriter/Producer* Horton, hockey player and creator of Tim Hortons coffee chain* Matichuk, current mayor of Greater Sudbury* Mau, designer* Tilley, creator of the Tilley hat* Trebek, host of Jeopardy! External links * Sudbury Secondary School Reunion* www.rainbowschools.ca/news/2007/3467.php
3793286
Thomson_River_(Victoria)
 footnotes              thumb|300px|Walhalla excursion train crossing the river about 1910The Thomson River is a river in Gippsland, Victoria, Australia. It starts below Newlands at the north western end of the  Baw Baw Plateau at an elevation of 972 m, where it shares a watershed with the River and River, and ends at an elevation of 1.55 m merging with the River near  Sale. The Thomson River drops around 970 m over its 170 km length.(http://maps.bonzle.com/c/a?ap&p215025&cmdsp)()The Thomson Valley was intensively mined for gold during the latter half of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Prospector Ned Stringer discovered significant quantities of alluvial gold at the junction of what is now known as Stringers Creek. A short distance up that creek the gold mining township of  Walhalla was established.The river is dammed not far below its source by the River Dam, which provides around 70% of Melbournes water storage and supplies about 30% of Melbournes water needs.()This takes about 50% of the rivers natural flow, which places a great environmental stress downstream. It particularly affects the Lakes, which include Lake Wellington, Lake Victoria and Lake King. This area has international significance as a Ramsar listed wetland site.(Environment Victoria - Thomson River)See also*River Diversion Tunnel References River (Victoria)()
3799869
Champion,_Alberta
footnotes                Champion is a village in Alberta, Canada within Vulcan County. It is located on Highway 23, approximately  north of Lethbridge and  south of Alberta. Demographics The population of the Village of Champion according to its 2007 municipal census is 384.()In the 2006 Census, Champion had a population of 364 living in 170 dwellings, a 2.5% increase from 2001. The Village  has a land area of   and a density of .() Government The village is governed by a village council consisting of a mayor and four councillors, and is administrated by a village manager. History Homesteaders began arriving in the Champion area in 1904 and 1905, mainly from the USA, Eastern Canada, and Britain. The vast prairie grasslands, cut through by the Bow River, provided ideal country for farming and ranching. One of these settlers was Martin G. Clever, who arrived in 1905. He homesteaded on the section of land (160 acres) where the town of Champion is currently located.The birth of the town was the product of the rapid settlement of the farming and ranching land in the area, but it was also fuelled by the discovery of coal. Homesteader Henry Therriualt opened the first coal mine in the area in 1906, and soon farmers were travelling from neighbouring towns (including Nanton and Stavely) to purchase coal from the Therriault mine. Their journey took them through the Clever homestead to reach the mine, and soon Martin Clever realized the business opportunity that presented itself.Soon, a country store and a mail route were established. When the storeowner (George Mark) applied to have a government post office located, the burgeoning settlement required a name, and in honour of Martin Clever, Cleverville was christened. Several other thriving businesses soon sprung up, thanks to Martin Clevers offer of the free use of his land: Cleverville was soon home to three general stores, a millinery and linen shop, drug store, butcher shop, blacksmith shop, livery stable, restaurant, two real estate offices, lumber yard, of Hamilton, and doctors office.In 1910 the Pacific Railway (CPR) reached the area, although it became apparent that the rails themselves would not run directly past Cleverville. As a result, the townspeople decided to move, using horses and skids and wagons, all of the buildings of the town to a new location closer to the railway. This new settlement required a new name, and so the relocated Cleverville became the new Village of Champion. Although there are several stories regarding how Champion got its name, the most likely (or at least the one most commonly retold) is that it was named after H.T. Champion, a banker in the Winnipeg firm Alloway and Champion, well-known bankers and loaners throughout the period of settlement of the west. The Alloway and Champion Bank in Manitoba built in 1905 is on the Registry of Historical Places of Canada. ( http://www.historicplaces.ca/visit-visite/affichage-display.aspx?id7346 Alloway and Champion Bank ) When the town of Champion was relocated, so the story goes, a Winnipeg C.P.R. man named the town after the prominent banker.The Village of Champion received its charter on May 27, 1911, and the first council meeting was held in June. The growing village required ever more services, and soon Champion was home to its first elevator (1912), a telephone office, a school (1913), recreational facilities, and an ever-growing number of retail shops and businesses. A local newspaper, The Champion Chronicle, was also started in 1918 or 1919, and remained in print until 1943.Agriculture sustained the growth of the Champion area. In 1915 Champion became known as the Million Bushel Town, as one million bushels of wheat were shipped that year. The Champion Board of Trade was eager to promote the village as a land of opportunity, and in 1913 published the promotional pamphlet Grain Golden Champion, which was sent around the world to entice settlers and entrepreneurs to move to the area. Claiming that of all the thriving towns and cities in Western Canada, destined to become the industrial centres of the future, none has established its position, or grown to such importance, in so brief a space of time, as Champion, the Board of Trade invited people to take up opportunities in, of course, grain farming, but also in poultry- and stock-raising, railway work, brick- and cement-making, and the development of the natural gas and coal resources in the area.However, Champion wasnt the only western settlement claiming to be the city of the future, and its population peaked at around 650 people. Nevertheless, Champion continued to mature into a stable and close-knit village. The building of the Community Hall in the late 1920s was a particularly important moment in the history of the town, and the Hall continues to host a variety of community social events to this day.Along with agriculture, coal mining was a particularly important economic engine for the area. After the initial discovery of coal by Henry Therriault, a number of mines were established. Between 1906 and 1965, when the last coal mine was shut down, there were 58 registered coal mines in the Champion area. In addition to these, there were numerous mines dug into the river or lake beds by families who used coal to heat their homes. Many farmers worked in the mines in the fall and winter months, when farming work was scarce and there was greater demand for coal to heat homes and businesses.Agriculture remained, however, the most important economic activity for the town and surrounding area. By the mid-1920s there were seven grain elevators, such distinct landmarks for all prairie towns, in Champion. However, as grain handling procedures, as well as world markets, changed throughout the 20th century, Champions wooden grain elevators, like so many throughout the prairies, became increasingly obsolete. Champions last elevator was torn down in 2004. Champions population throughout the years has remained small but active. Sports formed an important part of community life, particularly through the heyday of the Champion Mens baseball team throughout the 1950s and 1960s. Social and cultural clubs such as the Lions Club, the Champion branch of the Canadian Legion, 4-H clubs, scouts and guides, and the Pioneer Club, provide the social backbone of the village and surrounding area.Since its founding, the Village of Champion has celebrated its anniversary every five years, traditionally on the July 1st long weekend. In 2011 the town will celebrate its 100th anniversary, an important celebration for which planning has been underway for some years. Services Champion is home to two schools, the Champion Community School (115 students in grades 1-9, plus a parent-run kindergarten), and the Hope Christian School (grades K-12). Recreational and cultural services in the village include the Champion Public Library, the Community Pool (outdoors), the Pioneer Club Seniors Drop-In Centre, two baseball fields, the Champion Community Park and Campground, the Rodeo arena, and in the winter, a skating arena with natural ice.Retail services and businesses in Champion include a hotel/bar, two grocery stores, a bank, post office, and various other locally-owned businesses. In terms of emergency response, the Village of Champion is served by the RCMP detachment and EMS services in neighbouring Alberta, as well as the Champion Volunteer Fire Department.The village is home to several churches, including St. Marys Catholic Church, the Champion Congregational Church, and a local meetinghouse of Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Champion serves as a gateway to Bow Provincial Park, which is located 20 kilometres east of the village and provides camping and many other outdoor recreational activities. See also * of communities in Alberta* of villages in Alberta References * Champion History Society, Champion and District, (Friesens Corporation, 1999).* Champion History Committee, Cleverville/Champion, 1905-1970: A History of Champion and Area, (Friesen and Sons, 1977).* Sev Pasolli, Coal: Champions Black Gold: A History of the Coalmines in the Champion Coal Fields Area, 2006. External links *AlbertaFirst - Champion - Statistcs*http://southgrow.com/member-communities/village-champion - Current community information*http://www.championschool.ca/index.php - Champion Community School*http://hopechristianschool.ca/ - Hope Christian School*http://www.ourroots.ca/toc.aspx?id1469&qryIDa79ff29e-961a-47d3-9965-02ee6bb5309a - Digital copy of Grain Golden Champion, the Champion Board of Trades 1913 promotional brochure
3810593
Mungrisdale_Common
 long_d-3.06938thumb|300px|sketch map of Mungrisdale CommonMungrisdale Common, pronounced mun-grize-dl, with emphasis on grize, is a fell in the English District. Although Wainwright listed it as one of the 214 featured hills in his influential Guide to the Lakeland Fells it was his least favourite. He commented that it has no more pretension to elegance than a pudding that has been sat on.(Wainwright, Alfred: Pictorial Guide to the Lakeland Fells,Book 5 The Northern Fells: ISBN 0-7112-2458-7)  There is some speculation that Wainwright included the fell in his guide simply as a way to fill space, although this has never been proven. Mungrisdale Common is oddly named as it is a number of miles from Mungrisdale village, which lies in a different river catchment.TopographyMungrisdale Common lies north of Blencathra, of which it is an outlier. Gently graded grassy slopes fall from Atkinson Pike, Blencathras northern summit. Upon meeting the head of Blackhazel Beck this shoulder divides in two, the north eastern arm connecting to Crags and the north western branch continuing to descend to Mungrisdale Common. Beyond an almost imperceptible depression the reascent is only 6 ft.After the brief plateau of the summit the descent continues westward toward Skiddaw Forest. Confusingly this forest contains no trees&mdash;other than the windbreak of Skiddaw House &mdash; but is a marshy upland area at around 1,300 ft surrounded on all sides by higher fells. Three streams flow from Skiddaw Forest, dividing the Northern Fells into three sectors. Dash Beck runs north west, the River Caldew north east and the Glenderaterra Beck south. The three ranges of the Northern Fells are the Skiddaw massif to the south west, the Blencathra group&mdash; including Mungrisdale Common&mdash; to the south east and the area colloquially known as Back oSkiddaw( to the north. Skiddaw House, the lone building in the forest, has variously seen service as a shepherds bothy and a Hostel.The Glenderaterra Beck lies to the west of Mungrisdale Common and its tributary, Roughten Gill, forms the southern boundary. A further feeder on this flank is Sinen Gill, whose waterfall is one of the fells most notable features.( The River Caldew lies to the north, across which is Calva, most southerly of the Back oSkiddaw fells. Despite its uninspiring appearance Mungrisdale Common does therefore stand on the important Eden-Derwent watershed, though it is not well defined at this point.  Water from the southern flanks reach the sea at Workington while rain falling on the northern side heads for the Firth via Carlisle. This watershed continues across Skiddaw Forest between the headwaters of the Caldew and Glenderaterra, linking onward to Fell in the Skiddaw range.Mungrisdale Common  carries a very small cairn at the approximate summit, only constructed since Wainwright first encouraged climbing of the fell by including it in his 1962 guidebook. Two more prominent ancient cairns also grace the fell, one to the west of the summit and the other on a tongue of ground between Sinen Gill and Roughten Gill. A small stone pillar (marked stake on OS maps) stands on the watershed at the head of Glenderaterra Beck and a further prominent Cloven Stone marks its continuation higher up the slope. Both have served as boundary stones.(Geology and MiningIn common with much of the Fells the Kirk Stile Formation of the Skiddaw Group predominates. This is composed of laminated mudstone and siltstone with greywacke sandstone and is of Ordovician age. Unusually however, this is overlain by considerable beds of peat in the vicinity of Mungrisdale Common.(British Geological Survey: 1:50,000 series maps, England & Wales Sheet 29: BGS (1999)) The Glenderaterra valley was the scene of some mining activity in the nineteenth century. The northern workings were first named Glenderaterra Mine and later Brundholme Mine. These were driven primarily for lead, but also copper ore and baryte. The returns were never economic, the mine being abandoned in 1920. A little to the south was Blencathra Mine, worked unsuccessfully until about 1880.(Adams, John: Mines of the Lake District Fells: Dalesman (1995) ISBN 0-85206-931-6)Summit and viewWainwrights displeasure was not restricted to Mungrisdale Commons profile and he also remarked that Any one of a thousand tufts of tough bent and cotton-grass might lay claim to crowning the highest point...A thousand tufts, yet not one can be comfortably reclined upon, this being a summit that holds indefinitely all the water that falls upon it( The view includes a striking window to the south west between Lonscale Fell and Blencathra, revealing unexpectedly a run of high fells from Pillar to Crags. Elsewhere the view consists of those nearby fells surrounding Skiddaw Forest.(Ascentsfor people who wont be told( Wainwright suggested ascents from Keswick or Threlkeld via the Glenderaterra valley. An alternative would be from Scales or Mungrisdale via the Glenderamackin col. Most ascents are likely to be as part of a climb of Blencathra, the intervening ground being gentle of gradient.TriviaApart from the sub 1,000 ft Crag, Mungrisdale Common is the only Wainwright not to feature in Bill Birketts Complete Lakeland Fells.(Birkett, Bill: Complete Lakeland Fells: Collins Willow (1994): ISBN 0-0021-8406-0)References
3817710
Kandern
Kandern is a town in southwestern Germany in the state of Baden-Wrttemberg, in the Kreis (district) of Lrrach. During the of Schliengen, in which the Revolutionary army fought the forces of Austria, the battle lines of both armies terminated in Kandern. It is near a landmark called the Three-Country Corner (Dreilndereck in German) from which one can see parts of Germany, France, and Switzerland.Image:Sutter Birthplace.jpg|thumb|130px|left|The birthplace of Sutter in KandernTo many in North America, Kandern is best known as the birthplace of Sutter. It was on Sutters land that gold was discovered in 1848, marking the beginning of intensive settlement in California.Today, Kandern has a large community of English-speaking residents as a result of the presence of Forest Academy. This is an English-language institution founded in 1956. Most of the students are children of Christian missionaries from around the world, mainly from the States, Canada, and Korea.The of arms of Kandern is a pitcher on a yellow background. The blazon is Or a covered Jug Gules.  Geography thumb|right|Museum at Kandern railway stationKandern lies in Southwestern Germany, at the foot of the Forest.  North of Kandern is the Hochblauen, one of the highest hills in the southern Black Forest.  The Hochblauen lies at the end of the Kander Valley, and the source of the Kander is located there.  Through Kandern runs the well-known Westweg, a hiking trail through the Black Forest from Pforzheim to Basel. Nearby, one can find the Sausenberg and its castle. Neighboring Communities  Boroughs (Ortsteile) The city of Kandern consists of the town of Kandern itself, and the following villages: History bei Kandern 1848.jpg|thumb|right|Death of General Friedrich von Gagern in battle near Kandern in 1848Archaeological finds show that the area that is today Kandern was already inhabited in prehistoric times, by the Celts, and during the Roman period.  It was probably the local clay deposits that made the site attractive to the early settlers.  The name Kandern is of Germanic origin, meaning on the Kander. Kander is the name of the stream that flows through the town.  Its name comes from the Celtic kandera for clear flowing.Kandern is first mentioned in a document from the Abbey of St. Martin in Tours, France.  The document states that one Gundoson bought iron in loco municipalitum Chantra super fluvium Hantra (in the area of the town of Kandern on the river Kander)(Kandern ist lter als angenommen. Die Oberbadische 28 May 2009: Lrrach 10).  The next mention of Kandern was in the year 776 when Abbey obtained the title to some land near Kandern.  The annals of the cloister from the same period mention deliveries of iron from Kandern, showing that already by the 8th century it was a recognized location.  Throughout the Ages iron working provided Kandern with a certain amount of prosperity and freedom.The town of Kandern originally grew out of three localities:* Kandern, in the area of the present-day Lutheran church,* Minder-Kandern, near the present-day swimming pool, and* a settlement on the flat valley bottom near the paper millSeveral monasteries owned land in the area, and therefore exercised an influence on Kanderns early history.  The most important of these was the of St. Gallen in modern Switzerland.  St. Gallen was a powerful Imperial abbey, and acquired considerable territory around Kandern in the early Middle Ages. As a result of defeat in the Controversy, St. Gallen had to transfer its interests in the area to other monasteries, including St. Albans in Basel.Kandern was the main town of the domains of Sausenburg, which became part of the possessions of the of Baden in 1503.In 1810, Kandern was granted the right to become a city, the Stadtrecht, which included among other rights the right to be called a city, and to hold a weekly market.  Kandern lost the Stadtrecht due to municipal restructuring during the Reich.In 1848, during the Badische Revolution, a battle between revolutionaries under Hecker and Hessian troops under von Gagern occurred on the Scheidegg near Kandern.  Gagern was killed in the encounter, but the revolutionaries were defeated and scattered.Until 1972 Kandern was part of Landkreis (rural district) Mllheim.  On the dissolution of Landkreis Mllheim, Kandern became part of Lrrach.In 1974, the surrounding villages of Feuerbach, Holzen, Riedlingen, Sitzenkirch, Tannenkirch, and Wollbach jointed the town of Kandern, which then had the necessary population to reclaim the Stadtrecht.  Kandern and the neighboring villages are now collectively referred to as the City of Kandern. Religion As in all of the Margravite of Baden, Kandern took part in the Reformation in 1556, and has remained predominately Protestant since. Villages  Feuerbach 45pxThe first documented mention of Feuerbach was is the decimationis of the of Konstanz.  The village became part of the possessions of the Order of St. John in 1297 and eventually came to be owned by the Margrave of Hachberg in 1470.  In 1503 Feuerbach, like the rest of the Markgrflerland, became part of Baden. Feuerbach is a recognized wine-producing municipality with around 12 hectares of vineyards.  The modern church was built in 1846 on medieval foundations.  Feuerbachs community building houses the village offices, a youth center, the fire department and a community hall for the use of local clubs and individuals.(Feuerbach at kandern.de)The shield of Feurbach does not follow any of the themes used by the other Kandern municipalities. It is not a canting coat of arms, nor does it explicitly relate to the industrial tendencies of the citizens. It was in use long before the administrative merger with Kandern and had been officially registered in 1961.(Boven, David. The Heraldic Heritage of a Small Black Forest Community. Heraldry in Canada 42, 1-4 (December 2008): 11-18.) Holzen 45pxThe first documented reference to Holzen was in the year 1249.  In recent times, Holzen has become well known for its large stork population.  A stork refuge was built in Holzen in 1979 in hopes of re-establishing the large birds in the area, where they used to be common in medieval and early modern times.  The storks have spread over a wide area, and are particularly noticeable in their nests on church steeples throughout the Markgrflerland.In addition to the village offices,the Holzen Rathaus (hall) houses the Kandern Registration office and the local youth center.  New developments around Holzen complement the traditionally built Altdorf.Wine production is an important part of the local agriculture, with 1473 ares of vineyards in the area around the village.(Holzen at kandern.de) Riedlingen 45pxThe documentary evidence for the village of Riedlingen dates as far back as 972.  This village in the valley of the Feuerbach creek was already settled by the early Alamanni tribes in Roman times, as excavation of burials in the area has shown.  Here one finds a very traditional village center with a church and old farmhouses.  New development has surrounded the old village, particularly on the slopes of the Schorner, a forested hill to the north.  Riedlingen is the site of one of Kanderns industrial areas, as well as the Kandern golf course.  For two weeks each summer (and occasionally in winter) the Theater im Hof offers modern plays in a romantic interior courtyard converted to an open-air theater.(Riedlingen at kandern.de) Sitzenkirch 45pxThe first documented mention of Sitzenkirch was in 1120, when the village belonged to the Abbey of St. Blasien.Notable sights in the village include a Romanesque church built in 1290 and an overshot millwheel.  Until the time of the Reformation there was a small convent for nuns near the church.  The village was destroyed during the Peasants War of 1525, with only the church surviving.  The church and convent remained in the possession of St. Blasien until 1805.(Sitzenkirch at kandern.de) Tannenkirch 45pxTannenkirch was first documented in 1179.  The village of Tannenkirch itself is composed of four smaller villages; Tannenkirch, Ettingen, Uttnach, and Gupf, the former three of which have grown together and are now coterminous.  Due to Tannenkirchs location with good southern exposure, low precipitation, and an almost Mediterranean microclimate it is an ideal location for viniculture.  An interpretive trail through the vineyards informs visitors about the traditions of wine growing.In clear weather Tannenkirch has a good view of the Alsace, the Forest, the Jura and the peaks of the Alps.The village church contains medieval frescoes, and a family of storks in the nest on the steeple.During the Middle Ages, the Margrave held court on the nearby Sausenhard.  Kaltenherberge, today a riding stable, was originally a post station on the route from Basel to Frankfurt.Tannenkirch has its own kindergarten and grade school.  The main commercial activity is agriculture and vineyards (around 2262 are - 22.62 hectares), as well as local tradesmen and an implement dealership.(Tannenkirch at kandern.de)See also Tannenkirch in the German Wikipedia. Wollbach 45pxWollbach was first documented in 767.  Wollbach is the largest suburb of Kandern by population, and is composed of the villages of Wollbach, Egerten, Egisholz, Hammerstein, and Nebenau.  There are three historical mills in Wollbach; the Hofmhle - still in operation today, the Hammersteiner Mhle - today a private house, and the Bruckmhle - currently a restaurant.  In the surrounding forest there are remains of iron mines.  Public facilities in Wollbach include a kindergarten, grade school, and sports hall.  There are two museums in Wollbach, one of the painter Bhlen in his former house (today a restaurant), and a historical kiln in Nebenau.(Wollbach at kandern.de)See also Wollbach in the German Wikipedia. Politics  Mayor *since 1996: Bernhard Winterhalter CDU Town Council The town council currently consists of 20 members, besides the mayor.  The elections of June 13, 2004 had the following results#CDU 35.6% - 7 seats (-2)#FWV 27.4%  - 6 seats (+1)#SPD 20.9% - 4 seats ()#GRNE 16.1% - 3 seats ()Image:Kandern CoA.JPG|thumb|150px|Kanderns of arms on the Blumenplatz Coat of Arms The of arms of Kandern was granted on 11 November 1975. The blazon is Or a covered Jug Gules. The jug, or kanne, alludes to the towns name, and was first used on border stones as a village sign in the 18th century. There are no old seals known from the village. The oldest seals date from the early 19th century and show the shield bearing the jug. Since that time, all seals and images of the arms have shown this symbol, though its size and shape have changed considerably. Partnered Cities * Soufflenheim in Alsace since 1985. Culture and Sites of Interest  Museums Heimat- und Keramikmuseum Kandern (Homeland and Ceramic Museum):The museum was opened in 1776 in a stepped gable house from the 16th century.  In addition to many documents and items from Kanderns history, the museum  has a large collection of local pottery from the medieval times to the present.:The first floor contains a wide variety of utilitarian pottery made in Kandern through the ages.  The second floor is dedicated to artistic pottery, including work from Laeuger, one of the pioneers of modern German pottery, pieces from the Fayence-Manufaktur Kandern (1927 - 1938), Richard Bampi, Horst Kerstan, and current artists.:Historical artifacts include a copy of the Goldenen Sau von Kandern (Golden Sow of Kandern), a drinking pitcher in the shape of a boar commissioned by the Margrave in 1605 to commemorate a successful hunt in the Kandern area.  The original is in the Badischen Landesmuseum in Karlsruhe.(Badische-seiten.de) In addition, the museum has items from the Battle of Kandern, an important battle in the Revolution of 1848.Max-Bhlen-Museumhttp://www.max-boehlen-museum.de:The Bernese painter Max Bhlen (1902 - 1971) lived and worked from 1939 in Kandern - Egerten.  His house is now a restaurant with a museum which retains the impressions of the artist and a cross - section of his work.Museumscaf Riedlingen:The Museumscafe is located in the manor house of the Riedlingens former barn, built in 1825.  The museum contains toy collection including over 50 dollhouses and many stuffed bears.(Kanderns museums on kandern.de) Important Structures * Blumenplatz - a marketplace framed by classical, uniform houses.* Sutters birthplace* Castle - ruins of a castle from the 13th century.* Brgeln - a former abbey and provosts palace begun in the 10th century. Economy and Infrastructure Iron ore mining was an important activity in Kandern area until the 19th century, but is no longer practiced. Transportation The Autobahn A 98 am Rhein - Stockach and the 3 Buxtehude - Weil am Rhein connect Kandern to the long distance traffic net.The railway Chanderli runs along the route of the former Kandertalbahn (Kander Valley Railway) from Kandern to Haltingen. Education The Macke School Centre in Kandern consists of a Hauptschule and a Realschule.  There are grade schools (grades 1 - 4) in Kandern and Tannenkirch.  Wollbach has an extension campus of the Kandern grade school and a Frderschule (education).  Forest Academy, an English-speaking private school (grades 1 - 12) is also located in Kandern.  In addition, there are two communal and two Lutheran kindergartens, and one private Waldorf kindergarten. Notable residents  Born in Kandern * Mez (* 1808;  1877), Industrialist and politician.  Member of the Assembly, member of the Baden Landtag(parliament).* Sutter (* 1803;  1880 in Washington, D.C.), known as the California Kaiser.Image:Strae mit Kirche in Kandern.jpg|thumb|170px|Strae mit Kirche in Kandern by Macke Resided in Kandern * Kumaul, Doctor and medical pioneer, practiced for a time in 1850 in Kandern.* Hbner, Painter and author.* Macke, Expressionist painter - Used Kandern streets as a subject.* Bhlen, Painter who lived and painted in Kandern-Egerten from 1939 to his death in 1971. Bibliography *Scheer, Volker G.: Kandern. Stadt seit 1810. Ereignisse, Personen und Bilder der Kanderner Stadtgeschichte seit der Stadterhebung und bekannte und bedeutende Personen aus der lteren Geschichte Kanderns, Todtnauberg: Scheer, 2. erweiterte und ergnzte Auflage 2006, 520 S., 367 Abb., ISBN 3-00-016504-5 See also *Kander River in Switzerland Notes  External links  * Official website* Official site of the Golfclub Markgrflerland* Heraldic information* Village Information*  Kandern:History and images*  Kandern: Pictures and History (German)als:Kandernde:Kanderneo:Kandernfa:fr:Kandernit:Kandernlmo:Kandernnl:Kandernpl:Kandernpt:Kandernro:Kandernru:sr:vi:Kandernvo:Kandernwar:Kandern
3827863
Pollucite
Pollucite is a zeolite mineral with the formula (Cs,Na)2Al2Si4O122H2O with iron, calcium, rubidium and potassium as common substituting elements. It is important as a significant ore of caesium and sometimes rubidium. It forms a solid solution series with analcime. It crystallizes in the isometric - hexoctahedral crystal system as colorless, white, gray, or rarely pink and blue masses. Well formed crystals are rare. It has a Mohs hardness of 6.5 and a specific gravity of 2.9. It has a brittle fracture and no cleavage.Its typical occurrence is in lithium-rich granite pegmatites in association with quartz, spodumene, petalite, amblygonite, lepidolite, elbaite, cassiterite, columbite, apatite, eucryptite, muscovite, albite and microcline.It was first described by Breithaupt in 1846 for occurrences on the island of Elba, Italy. It is named for Pollux, the twin of Castor on the grounds that it is often found associated with petalite (previously known as castorite).() The high caesium content was missed by the first analysis by Friedrich Plattner in 1848,() but after the discovery of caesium in 1860 a second analysis in 1864 was able to show the high caesium content of pollucite.()About 82% of the worlds known reserves of pollucite occur near Lake in Manitoba, Canada, where they are mined for their caesium content for use in caesium formate oil drilling assistance. (http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1G1-75752682.html Original reference to Mining Journal, March 2, 2001, p 160. Accessed March 28, 2009) This ore is about 20% by weight caesium.Francium, an intensely radioactive element related to rubidium and caesium, can occur in minute quantities in certain pollucite ores, because the most stable isotope is Francium-223 with a half-life of 21.8 minutes. Some of the initial and much-disputed discoveries of this element involved the spectral analysis of pollucite, showing unexplained lines attributed by the existence of a new element. References External links *Fontani, Marco (2005-09-10). The Twilight of the Naturally-Occurring Elements: Moldavium (Ml), Sequanium (Sq) and Dor (Do). International Conference on the History of Chemistry: 18. Retrieved on 2007-04-08. de:Pollucitfr:Polluciteit:Pollucitehu:Pollucitnl:Pollucietpl:Pollucytpt:Polucitaru:fi:Pollusiittitr:Polsituk:
3834167
Joseph_Brown
Joseph Brown may refer to:*Brown (NY Artisan)(1984), artist, wood carver *Brown (actor) (1920-2009), actor and theater professor known as Victor Millan*Brown (artist) (1918-2009), Australian artist and collector*Brown (Australian politician) (1844-1925), member of the Australian Parliament: 1906-1910*Brown (Missouri politician) (1823-1899), mayor of Alton and St. Louis, Missouri*Brown (shipbuilder), builder of the Tuscumbia (1862)*Renshaw Brown (1805-1870), U.S. politician and Minnesota pioneer *Brown (football coach), Eastern Illinois University coach*C. Brown (died 1849), surveyor of the Louisiana Purchase *Emerson Brown (1821-1894), U.S. Senator and Governor of Georgia*Edgar Brown (18801939), U.S. Representative from Tennessee*Epes Brown (1920-2000), author of the book The Sacred Pipe*Evans Brown (18911973), American actor*Mackey Brown (18511932), Governor of Georgia*Owen Brown (18481903), mayor of Pittsburgh*Joseph Brown (18541922), mining engineerSee also*Brown (disambiguation)*Browne (disambiguation)Brown
3844573
Cananea
 File:Col. Greene, Cananea 1906.jpg|thumb| Col. C. Greene addresses striking miners in Cananea, 1906. Photo courtesy SMU. File:CananeaCity.jpg|thumb|View of city, mine and smelter, 2007Cananea (from the Apache term for horse meat) is a city in the northern Mexican state of Sonora. It is the seat of the municipality of the same name. The population of the city was 31,560 as recorded by the 2010 census.  The population of the municipality, which includes rural areas, was 32,936. The total area of the municipality is approximately .This is the location where the company the Consolidated Copper Company controlled by Col. Cornell Greene of Green Consolidated Copper Mining was founded in 1899 and was one participant in the Strike of 1906 that resulted in the death of 23 people in a fight between the strikers and a posse led by Rangers from the States. A corrido titled crcel de Cananea (jail) written in 1917 and commemorating the incident has since become famous. At the time of the strike the population of 23,000 included 7,000 Americans and 5,000 Chinese.( WENT AGAINST ORDERS; Governor of Arizona Warned Capt. Rynning and Other Americans, New York Times, June 3, 1906.)HistoryThe first non-native inhabitants of the land where Cananea is now located arrived in 1760. Jesuit priests discovered and extracted gold and silver mines.General Pesqueira, native of nearby Arizpe, retired to this area. He continually fought Apache Indians who attacked the area, and once while chasing them in the mountains he discovered the abandoned mines and by 1868 he had renewed the extraction of minerals in the Cananea mines.  General Pesqueiras wife, Elena Pesqueira Pesqueira, discovered a nearby sierra and the General named the highest peak La Elenita (The Little Elena, 9,327 feet or 2,843 meters above level) in her honor. The other peak is named La Mariquita (The Little Mary, 8,123 feet or 2,476 meters above sea level). In 1889 William Cornell Greene purchased the mine from General Pesqueira and founded the Sonora-based company, The Cananea Consolidated Copper Company, S. A. (CCCC or 4C).On October 31, 1901, the area became a municipality with Cananea town as its seat. On July 11, 1957, Cananea town became a city. Cananea jailThe Cananea jail was built in 1903 and is located in downtown Cananea. It was the first public jail of the city and is currently a museum (de la Lucha Obrera) with exhibitions of photographs and instruments used in mining.The Cananea Jail song is a corrido that has become part of the culture of Cananea and the state of Sonora. It describes the experiences of a man accused of murdering Chinese immigrants while at this jail. According to historian Rodolfo Rascn, a man called Francisco, nicknamed El Cucharn de Batuc (The Big Spoon of Batuc), wrote the song in 1917.ClimateThe municipality of Cananea has a semi-hot subhumid climate, with an average monthly maximum temperature of 74.3F (23.5 C) in the months of June to September and an average monthly minimum of 45.3 F (7.4 C) in December and January; the average annual temperature is 59.5F (15.3 C).The rainy season is in summer in the months of July to September, with an average annual rainfall of 21.5 inches (545 millimeters). In the months of February, March, and April there are frequent frosts, hailstorms, and occasional snowstorms. In winter the rains are less intense, but of longer duration. Called equipatas, they can fall in the form of snow.dateMay 2011EconomyMining is and will be the main source of revenue for Cananea for the foreseeable future. Eighty percent of the population is directly and/or indirectly supported by mining companies in Cananea. The first and most important mining company is Mexicana de Cananea, S.A. de C.V. owned by Southern Copper Corporation. (NYSE:SCCO) and still shares ownership with Grupo Mexico, S.A.B. de C.V. (BMV: GMEXICO). The Mining Operations Director assigned to Cananea is Isaac Lpez Arzola. The miners National Union of Mining and Metallurgical Workers Sindicate, Section No.65 (Labor Union), have as their General Secretary, since 2001, Gmez Urrutia. Cananea produced 163,804 tons of copper in 2006. It is among the worlds largest copper mines in terms of reserves.The company plans to invest $1.14 billion over the next five years in a major expansion which will more than double Cananeas production capacity. The Cananea mine has a long history of labor problems, the most recent being an ongoing strike since June 2007. The second and smaller active copper mine is Minera Maria, owned by Empresas Frisco, a division of  Grupo Carso, and located west of Cananea.Industry is the second most important activity in the local economy, generating around 3,100 jobs.  There is a modest industrial park situated north of the town with an area of .  There are several companies operating as maquiladoras.  The most important are Stewart Connector Systems de Mxico, S.A.; Fundidora de Cananea, S.A. and Road Machinery Company de Mxico, S.A. which together provide 600 jobs and are involved in diverse activities, from cable assembly to production of steel.Cattle raising is important and there were approximately 16,000 head in the last census.Farming consists mainly of corn, potatoes, beans, sorghum, alfalfa, barley, and apples.  Most of these crops are used for local consumption and cattle fodder.  The infrastructure consists of 30 wells, equipped with a system of electrical motors, and 10 kilometers (6 mi) of reinforced canals used for irrigation. Twin towns *  Vista, USA*  Radebeul, Germany Notable residents *Cornell Greene - Founder of modern Cananea, The Greene Consolidated Copper Company and The Cananea Consolidated Copper Company.  *Rodrguez - Mexican Baseball Hall of Fame inductee*Francisco Chico Rodrguez - Mexican Baseball Hall of Fame inductee*Jaime Corella - Mexican Baseball Hall of Fame inductee*Hector Castro - 14th Governor of The State of Arizona*Claudio X. Gonzlez - CEO Kimberly-Clark de Mxico, S.A.B. - Director Kimberly-ClarkSources*  Site of the presidency of the municipality of Cananea*  Cananea at the site of the Government of Sonora*  The Cananea Strike at the Obrera de Mxico*  Cananea at Jornada*  http://www.elimparcial.com/EdicionEnLinea/Notas/Noticias/28052007/242450.aspx*  Sindicato Minero Seccion 65 of CananeaReferencesExternal links*  Cananea.com, a site with information on the city* Cananea.net, official site of The Cananea Consolidated Company.de:Cananeaes:Cananea(komunumo)(Messico)lt:Kananjanl:Cananeano:Cananeapt:Cananearo:Cananearu:
3853223
Katharine_Mary_Briggs
:Katharine Mary Briggs should not be confused with the psychologist, Cook Briggs.Katharine Mary Briggs (November 8, 1898 &ndash; 1980) was an English writer, who wrote The Anatomy of Puck, the 4-volume Dictionary of British Folk-Tales, and various other books on fairies and folklore.BiographyShe was born in Hampstead, London, the eldest of three surviving daughters of Ernest Edward Briggs, who came from Yorkshire (his family had had great success in mining in Halifax and Wakefield), and Mary Cooper.  The other two sisters were named Winifred and Elspeth. Ernest was a watercolour artist with a specific interest in Scottish scenery who often told his children stories, possibly sparking Katharines life-long interest in them.  The family moved to Perthshire in 1911, where Ernest built a house, Dalbeathie House. Ernest died there two years later in 1913.  Katharine began attending Margaret Hall, Oxford in 1918, obtained a BA in 1922, and took her MA in 1926.Returning home (because of the family coal legacy, and a colliery in Normantown, she did not need to seek work), she began writing and running plays - the entire family enjoyed theatrical productions, and it was a life-long interest of Katharines - while she studied folklore and 17th century English history. She gained her PhD with a thesis on Folklore in seventeenth century literature (Folklore in Literature) after the Second World War; during the war, she had been busy teaching in a Polish refuge school and working for the medical branch of the WAAF. After her first book on British fairies, The Personnel of Fairyland, Briggs went on to write many other books on folklore, including the 4-volume Dictionary of British Folktales in the English Language (published in 1971), The Anatomy of Puck and its sequel, Pale Hecates Team (1962), An Encyclopedia of Fairies (1976), and various other books on fairies and folklore; a number were childrens books like The Legend of Maiden-Hair (her first published book) or Hobberdy Dick, and Kate Crackernuts. She was awarded the Doctorate in Literature in 1969. She lived the latter part of her life at House in Burford, along with her sisters and her many cats, while working for the Society, which named an award in her honour.()  Briggs died in 1980.External links*Archives Hub page*Entry at University of Southern Mississippi de Grummond Collection*Genealogical entries and biographical sketches of Ernest Edward Briggs and Katharine*Biographical sketch from the of Leeds -(pdf)*Katharine Briggs Award Commemorates Briggs as scholar and former Folklore Society PresidentReferences(Mary Briggs
3862247
SubTropolis
 pronunciation thumb|The interior of SubTropolisSubTropolis is a 55,000,000 square foot (5,060,000 m),  manmade cave in the bluffs above the River in City, Missouri, States that is claimed to be the worlds largest underground storage facility.Developed by late City Chiefs owner Hunt via Hunt Midwest Real Estate Development, Inc., it has trademarked the phrase Worlds Largest Underground Business Complex.  Dug into the Bethany Falls limestone mine  SubTropolis is at places  beneath the surface.  It has a grid of  high,  wide tunnels separated by  square limestone pillars created by the room and pillar method of hard rock mining.  The complex contains almost seven miles (11 km) of illuminated, paved roads and several miles of railroad track. Currently 5,000,000 square feet (460,000 m) is occupied and 10,000,000 square feet (920,000 m) are improved.  About  of available space are added each year as active mining continues.The mine naturally maintains temperatures between 65 and 70 degrees Fahrenheit (18 to 21 C) year-round. The States Postal Service and the States Environmental Protection Agency lease spaces within SubTropolis, the States Postal Service for its collectible stamp operations and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for their Region-7 and Logistics Center.On the north edge of the complex Hunt developed the of Fun and of Fun amusement park complex.  Hunts extensive business dealings in Clay County contributed to the Chiefs having their Training Camp at Jewell College in Missouri until 1991.Other facilities like SubTropolis exist although not on the same scale, such as the abandoned mine in Pennsylvania used by Corbis and the Federal Government for secure storage.  As the room and pillar mining method is used to extract limestone throughout the Midwest, many companies are looking at ways to utilize the hundreds of millions of square feet created in this manner for everything from mushroom farming to oil stockpiling.SubTropolis TenantsSubTropolis is used by around 50 businesses and organizations,(Elliott, Monica. Subterranean sprawl: at SubTropolis, what lies beneath is a land of industrial opportunity, Industrial Engineer, 1 December 2003.) including:* University* Print* Vanguard Packaging* Jack Stack Barbecue* States Postal Service* Cards* Paris Brothers* Hantover* Clore Automotive* Transglobal* EarthWorks/Learning ExchangeReferences*Kansas City Star profile(External links* SubTropolis home site (Hunt Midwest)* Hunt Midwest home site (Hunt Midwest)* SubTech Data Center home site (Hunt Midwest)
3870973
Mike_Holovak
CollegeHOF40001Michael Joseph Holovak (September 19, 1919 - January 27, 2008) was an American football player, coach and executive who served as a head coach at the collegiate level with College, then handled similar duties with the Football Leagues Boston Patriots from 1961 to 1968.Early lifeHolovak, one of six children and the youngest of five sons of Czechoslovakian immigrants, grew up in the coal mining town of Pennsylvania. During his high school playing days, he helped defeat a team coached by future legend Lombardi. Career  College player Playing collegiately at Boston College for three years beginning in 1940, Holovak was a starter at running back at under head coaches Leahy and Myers, averaging more than five yards per carry. During his sophomore year, the undefeated Eagles competed in the Bowl.Two years later, Holovak served as co-captain of the Eagles squad that entered the final weeks of the 1942 campaign as the top-ranked college team in the country. However, on November 28 they were upset by arch-rival the of the Holy Cross, a defeat that canceled a victory party that night at Bostons Cocoanut Grove hotel. That decision proved to be chillingly wise when a horrendous fire swept through the building that night, killing 492 people and injuring hundreds more.The team regrouped to compete in the Orange Bowl game, a contest in which he rushed for 158 yards on just 10 carries and scored a record-setting three touchdowns. He earned All-America honors that season and finished fourth in voting for the Trophy. Professional player On April 8, 1943, the Cleveland Rams, who had earlier announced they were suspending operations for the duration of War II, selected Holovak in the first round of the Draft. Holovak then enlisted in the States Navy, going on to command a PT boat that sank nine Japanese ships, and later battling malaria. However, despite his heroics, he was dealt a heavy personal blow when one of his brothers lost his life during the four-year conflict.Holovak officially signed with the Rams on December 29, 1944, but didnt take the field until 1946, by which time the franchise had relocated to Los Angeles. During his one season with the team, he gained 211 yards and scored three touchdowns.Traded to the Bears on January 27, 1947, Holovak would lead the pass-oriented Windy City squad in rushing during each of the next two years, also three touchdowns. Prior to the start of his first year with the Bears, Holovak got his first taste of coaching by assisting with the spring practice of of San Francisco head coach McKeever.After his two years in Chicago, Holovak retired on March 1, 1949 to become the freshman football coach at his alma mater. After two seasons in which he compiled an undefeated record, he was promoted to head coach at Boston College on December 30, 1950, following the resignation of Myers. Coach In his first five years, Holovak compiled a mark of 24-16-5, winning Coach of the Year honors in 1954 from New England football writers. Those efforts were good enough to earn him a new four-year contract on November 22, 1955, but even after four more winning seasons, he was fired on December 3, 1959, after a year in which Eagle fans had subjected him to constant verbal abuse.Two weeks after his dismissal, Holovak signed as a scout with the fledgling Patriots, then was named an assistant under Saban on March 29, 1960. After a 5-9 record that year and a 3-2 start in 1961, Saban was fired on October 10 and replaced by Holovak. Finishing with a 9-4-1 record, Holovak matched that record the following year, earning him a new three-year contract, with an option for another year.In 1963, the Patriots reached the postseason for the first time, despite only compiling a 7-6-1 record. They then defeated the Bills in an Eastern Conference playoff, but were then pounded in the AFL Championship game, 51-10, by the Diego Chargers. The next year, Holovak added the duties of general manager to his job description, and after the team improved to 10-3-1, he was named AFL Coach of the Year on December 15, 1964 and received a new five-year contract.However, the veteran unit slipped to 4-8-2 in 1965, but rebounded into contention the next season with the addition of rookie running back Nance. Needing only a victory in their final game against the New York Jets on December 17 to reach the AFL title contest, the Patriots instead saw their 1966 season end with an 38-28 upset loss. The defeat was softened somewhat when Holovak again won the leagues Coach of the Year accolade.Age finally caught up with the team over the next two years with the Patriots managing only a 7-20-1 record. The end result was that Holovak was fired from both positions on January 7, 1969, ending his Patriots tenure with a mark of 53-47-9. As in his previous stint at Boston College, Holovak saw growing fan discontent, including chants of Goodbye Mike, play a role in the decision.He would later coach in one game for the York Jets, replacing Lou Holtz who had resigned before the last game of the 1976 season.  His overall career record as a NFL head coach was 53-48-9, .522 win pct. Executive After first considering an assistant coaching position with the Raiders, Holovak instead remained a Patriots scout, but shifted gears somewhat by taking a position with the State Racing Commission. However, just two months later, he left that position to become an assistant with the San Francisco 49ers. Personal tragedy, though, soon intervened when his 18-year-old daughter Ann, one of two girls, was killed in an auto accident on the night of her senior prom on June 13.After two years with the 49ers, Holovak remained in the Bay Area by accepting the post of receivers coach with the Raiders on March 6, 1971. When the team failed to reach the postseason for the first time in five years, Holovak was let go, but signed as a scout with the New York Jets on July 10, 1972. Returning to sidelines the next year as running backs coach, he then moved into the Jets front office following the NFL season as Director of Player Personnel.He remained in that role for two seasons, but when Jets head coach Lou Holtz resigned before the final game of the season, Holovak handled the duties in a 42-3 loss to the Bengals on December 12. He then announced his resignation on May 20, 1977, citing personal reasons. In 1980 he was elected to the Football Foundations Football Hall of Fame, then returned to football on February 15, 1981, when he was named executive vice-president of the Houston Oilers. Rebuilding the team following the departure of popular head coach Phillips, Holovak made his most adept move when he strongly recommended the signing of Football League quarterback Moon in 1984.By 1988, Holovak was being phased out by Oilers general manager Herzeg, with his duties limited to scouting. However, after Herzeg left in a contract dispute after the season, Holovak was named general manager on February 2, 1989. He remained in that role until the end of NFL season, but remained a scout for the franchise, which later shifted to Tennessee, until retiring for good in 1999.On January 27, 2008, Holovak died in Florida from complications from pneumonia. He was 88 years old.(Matthews, mourners recall respect for Oilers GM Holovak | Chron.com - Houston Chronicle)He is laid to rest at Floridas National Cemetery.See also* College Football All-America Team* Other American Football League players, coaches and contributorsReferences(External links*
3882103
Thomas_Baines_(Ontario)
Thomas Baines (17991867) was born in Caynham, England, as the son of the Rev. James Johnson Baines, and came to Canada c.1821. He worked as a land and immigrant agent with Peter Robinson, most notably settling the Irish immigrants in the Bathurst district and Ontario. He was later commissioned as an officer in the 1st Carleton Regiment and was made Deputy Auditor General. Due to his experience of land assessment and transaction in Ontario, he was appointed as Secretary of the Corporation in 1833 and executed the sale of the controversial Reserves. By 1838, the Corporation was essentially dissolved and Thomas was appointed Crown Land Agent for the Home District. He continued in this role until 1855 when he tendered his resignation to the Lieutenant Governor following allegations of default. He was shown to be in arrears (the greatest default in pre-Confederation Ontario) and so was forced to cede all his property to the government. From 1844-63 he owned a Brewery at Queen and Niagara Streets called the West Toronto Brewery while he also owned a mill at Innisville.(Garrison Common History: The Breweries in The Fife and Drum: The Newsletter of the Friends of Fort York and Garrison Common v.8 No.2, Sept. 2004; Sneath, A.W. Brewed in Canada: The Untold Story of Canadas 350-Year-Old Brewing Industry Dundurn Press Ltd., 2001; Westfall, W. The Founding Moment: Church Society, and the Construction of Trinity College London: McGill-Queens University Press, 2002) The Brewery was sold to Patrick Cosgrave in 1863 and continued making beer for another eighty years. He was also involved in the incorporation of a number of companies in the Toronto area including the Western Assurance Company in 1851, as well as the Victoria Mining Company and the Toronto and Georgian Bay Canal Company in 1856. Thomas Baines died in 1867 at Toronto. He married twice, first to Georgina Catherine Lodge Wilcocks by who he had one surviving child; his second marriage was to Catherine, daughter of William Bancks, the founder of Ontario, by whom there were many other children, including Dr. Mackenzie Baines the first Physician-in-Chief of the for Sick Children.References*****
3886214
David_MacMichael
David MacMichael is a former Intelligence Agency (CIA) analyst.  A ten-year veteran of the Marine Corps, he was a counter-insurgency expert in South-East Asia for four years.(Jonathan Steele, The CIA man who turned to the Nicaraguans / Profile of David MacMichael, Guardian (9 January 1985).) He also served as an analyst for the Intelligence Council from 1981-1983.  MacMichael graduated with an MA and Ph.D. in History from the of Oregon.  MacMichael resigned from the CIA in July 1983 because he felt the Agency was misrepresenting intelligence for political reasons.(Philip Taubman, In from the Cold and Hot for Truth, York Times (11 June 1984) p. B6.)  His public resignation from the Agency gave credence and notability to his vocal indictment of the Administrations policy toward America.(See Philip Taubman, In from the Cold and Hot for Truth, New York Times (11 June 1984) p. B6; Moynihan: data lacking on Nicaragua arms traffic, Science Monitor (14 June 1984) p. 2; Nicaragua, Pro and Contra New York Times (18 June 1984) p. A18; Joan Edwards, Reagans charges total untruths, ex-CIA man says, and Mail (29 June 1984).)  He was considered the key witness in v. United States.  The case was heard in 1986 before the Court of Justice, which ruled that the United States had violated international law by supporting the Contras in their war against the Nicaraguan government and by mining Nicaraguas harbors. MacMichael also testified in front of Congress on this matter.(Shirley Christian, Nicaraguas American Lawyers Prepare Case, New York Times (8 September 1985) p.23; Associated Press, Ex-CIA Aide Testifies in Hague, New York Times (14 September 1985) p. 3.)A former investigator for the Institute, he was an outspoken critic of the Institutes reliance on theory, arguing that the Institute was eager, perhaps overeager, to demonstrate that this enterprise secret team of conservatives(See Secret Team) was responsible for everything since Cain slaying Abel.(Felicity Barringer, Giving Law Teeth (and Using Them on Lawyers), New York Times (17 March 1989) p. B4.)  In July 2005, he testified at a special joint hearing of Congressional and Senate Democrats about the consequences of the affair.MacMichael is a member of Intelligence Professionals for Sanity (VIPS), founding member of of National Security Alumni and the for Responsible Dissent,(Ex-CIA spies set up group fighting to ban action Star (27 November 1987) p. A3.) and an outspoken critic of the War and the Bush Administration.  He has participated in six films from 1988-2003.http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0533984/  Journalist Pilger has described him as a CIA renegade.(John Pilger, Having a fun time in New Orleans: the latest recruits (sorry, alumni) of latter-day Reaganism, Statesman (13 November 1998).)NotesSee also*Nicaragua vs. United States Details MacMichael testimony at the trial.
3890804
Leninsk-Kuznetsky
Leninsk-Kuznetsky (), known as Kolchugino () until 1925, is a city in Oblast, Russia, located on both banks of the River (Obs tributary). Population:    128,000 (1972); 83,000 (1939); 20,000 (1926).Leninsk-Kuznetsky is one of the main mining centers of the Basin.The first establishment goes back to 1763 with the creation of a village of Kolchugino. The extraction of coal started in 1870 but did not become really intensive until 1912 when there was an infusion of French capital. The agglomeration was renamed Leninsk in 1922, then Leninsk-Kouznetsky in 1924. It was granted town status in 1925. The city is entirely turned towards the extraction of coal. Many mines are within the limits of the city.The city is on the trunk roads Leninsk-KuznetskyNovosibirsk and KemerovoNovokuznetsk and on the railway lines NovosibirskNovokuznetsk and KemerovoNovokuznetsk.The city has had a bus network since 1984.It is where the final Olympic gymnastic teams trained for Summer Olympics in Beijing.Referencesar:--de:Leninsk-Kusnezkiet:Leninsk-Kuznetskies:Lninsk-Kuznetskieo:Leninsk-Kuzneckijfa:-fr:Leninsk-Kouznetskios:-it:Leninsk-Kuzneckijlv:einska-KuzeckaLeninskasnl:Leninsk-Koeznetskino:Leninsk-Kuznetskijnn:Leninsk-KuznetskijKunieckipt:Leninsk-Kuznetskyro:Leninsk-Kuznekiru:-fi:Leninsk-Kuznetskisv:Leninsk-Kuznetskijtl:Leninsk-Kuznetskywar:Leninsk-Kuznetskydiq:Leninsk-Kuznetskyzh:-
3899649
Merthyr_Vale
Merthyr Vale ( or ) is a village in the Welsh borough of Tydfil, Glamorgan. Lying on the road it is on the east bank of the Taff opposite Aberfan.Ynys OwenYnys Owen, which translates from Welsh to English as Owains riverside meadow, has been claimed by some to possibly commemorated Glyn Dwr, whose followers were involved in an uprising around 1400. The area was referred to and written as Ynys Owen as early as 1630, noting that the narrow valley was heavily wooded, with various traditional Tyddyns (long-house farms) marking out the various rural farming territories.(DevelopmentThere had been small scale coal extraction at Danyderi and Perthygleision, but in 1869 John Nixon started development of the Taff Colliery, later to be known as the Vale Colliery. The village immediately grew up around the shaft development, as did the later communities of Aberfan, Nixonville and Mount Pleasant. Completed in 1875, when the first commercial coal was brought up, there was a celebration called in the local Windsor Hotel.()HistoryAs the colliery was not the first developed in the area, and as colliery developers and owners were known to generally restrict spending on surrounding communities in which they housed their workers, Merthyr Tydfil council insisted on Merthyr Vale being developed with both adequate snaitation, as well as community infrastructure. Resultantly, planning regulations stipulated that the Parish had effective sanitary and water supplies from the beginning.(Commercial hotels, public houses and clubs, developed on an exclusive lease from the colliery owner, soon appeared to fill the leisure time and keep workers within the area. Religious buildings included chapels and churches for: Zion, Baptist, Calfaria, Welsh Baptist Bethel, Wesleyan Methodist, Disgwylfa, Calvinist Methodist and Trinity, Presbyterian. Zion and Calfaria merged in 1974 to form the modern Baptist Church at Nixonville, which contains the first fibre-glass Baptistry built in Wales. St Benedicts Roman Catholic Church was built in 1932. The Anglican Church of St Mary and Holy Innocents was built in 1974; replacing the earlier church which was built, with help from Merthyr Vale Colliery, in 1926.The former Merthyr Vale School was built in 1879, while the Mount Pleasant School dates from 1912. Vale railway station opened in 1883.() The Gordon Lennox Constitutional Club was built in 1901, by the proprietor of the Brown-Lennox Engineering Company in Pontypridd, also the President of the East Glamorgan Conservative.(In War II, while on a training exercise from No.53 OTU, two Canadian Air Force Spitfires collided over the village on 7 July 1941. The aircraft (X4024) of Sgt Gerald Fenwick Manuel (R/69888),( 25, from Nova Scotia,() crashed into the home of the Cox family, claiming the lives of Doreen Cox 33, and her two daughters Phyllis, 14 and Doreen, 3. Husband James Cox, who was a shift worker at a munitions factory and was asleep in the house at the time of the crash, was thrown to safety; thier three boys, Donald, Thomas and Len, were out playing. Neighbours tried to rescue the family - who had just returned from a shopping trip - but the heat from the fire was too intense. The second aircraft (X4607) of Sgt Lois Curly Goldberg (R/56185),() 27, from Montreal, crashed into a field in Mount Pleasant, Treharris.() The bodies of Sgt Manuel and the deceased family members were buried two days later in Ffrwd Cemetery, Tydfil, while the body of Sgt Goldberg was interned in the Jewish cemetery at Cefn-coed-y-cymmer. A mural was painted by local school children and unveiled by the Candian Commissioner shortly afterwards on the same site,() while there is an ongoing campaign by the Cox family for a permanent memorial.()The village appears in Fleischers 1971 film, Rillington Place starring Attenborough and Hurt. As Evans (Hurt) comes back to Wales, he is seen walking from the station, with various scenes then shot inside the main village.(Aberfan disasterFor many years, millions of cubic metres of excavated mining debris from the colliery were deposited on the side of Merthyr, directly above the village of Aberfan on the opposite side of the valley. Huge piles, or tips, of loose rock and mining spoil had been built up over a layer of highly porous sandstone that contained numerous underground springs, and several tips had been built up directly over these springs. Although local authorities had raised specific concerns in 1963 about spoil being tipped on the mountain above the village primary school, these were largely ignored by the Coal Boards area management.(Iain McLean & Martin Johnes: The Aberfan Disaster website)Early on the morning of Friday, 21 October 1966, after several days of heavy rain, a subsidence of about 36 metres occurred on the upper flank of colliery waste tip No. 7. At 9:15 a.m. more than 150,000 cubic metres of water-saturated debris broke away and flowed downhill at high speed. A mass of over 40,000 cubic metres of debris smashed into the village in a slurry  deep.(South Wales Police official website - The Aberfan Disaster)The slide destroyed a farm and twenty terraced houses along Moy Road, and slammed into the northern side of the Pantglas Junior School and part of the separate senior school, demolishing most of the structures and filling the classrooms with thick mud and rubble up to  deep. Mud and water from the slide flooded many other houses in the vicinity, forcing many villagers to evacuate their homes.In total, 116 children and 28 adults were killed.The Coventry Playground was built in 1972 on the site of the old Merthyr Vale School, with the monies collected by the people of Coventry. The playground was officially opened by the mayor of Coventry.References External links *Old Merthyr Tydfil: Merthyr Vale- Historical Photographs of Merthyr Vale.*GENUKI(tm) page*www.geograph.co.uk : photos of Merthyr Vale and surrounding area*cy:Ynysowen
3902359
List_of_Star_Wars_substances
The following is a list of substances, including food and drugs, found in the fictional series Wars.Artusian crystalsArtusian crystals are crystals used to make a life form artificially force-sensitive by trapping energy gathered inside the Valley of the Jedi.  They are similar to the Crystal found in the Star Wars novel of the Minds Eye and were introduced to the Star Wars mythos in the LucasArts game Wars: Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast.BactaBacta is a healing substance available from the planet Thyferra, where two competing cartels, the Zaltin and Xucphra corporations, control almost all of the product.  Bacta was invented by the insectoid Vratix of Thyferra by mixing alazhi salve with a synthetic liquid chemical called kavam. This concoction is further mixed with a colorless viscous liquid called ambori. During the Galactic Civil War, the Empire realized the importance of bacta and shut down all satellite manufacturing centers, allowing the bacta plants on Thyferra to have a total monopoly on production. It is much more available  than kolto, since the Empire occupied Manaan, severing the connection between the Selkath and the Rebel Alliance. It mimics the bodys fluids and helps in regeneration. It is used to help with cuts and burns as well as severe cellular damage, such as frostbite.There are several methods of bacta application. Cuts and burns can be treated with bacta patches, small disposable patches covered in bacta gel or by injection. Those suffering from serious illnesses, or serious injuries - such as frostbite - are helped by becoming submerged in the liquid in bacta tanks, such as the one that cured Skywalker in The Empire Strikes Back. Also, Grievous was put into a bacta tank after being critically injured in a shuttle crash that eventually led to the creation of his fearsome bio-droid body.Additionally, bacta seems to have a dramatically regenerative effect on Gand.Bacta is in many Star Wars videogames; it is often used to heal the main character in the game. This is true in Knight: Jedi Academy  Knight II: Jedi Outcast, of the Sith, Battlefront, II and Commando. Usually, the bacta is held in small cylinders, or in a robotic structure that has a seemingly endless supply. The players custom characters in Star Wars II: The Original Trilogy are normally held in bacta tanks until they are chosen to be the main player in a level.  In one of the missions of X-Wing Alliance the player has to escort bacta to a rebel hospital.BeskarBeskar is also known as Mandalorian iron.  It is a very rare metal that only the Mandalorian armoursmiths know how to shape.  It is fairly useless  when mined, but when it is shaped by the secrets of the Mandalorians, it becomes a very hard metal, capable of absorbing many hits from blasters and even lightsabers.  The Mandalorians make their armour and swords out of it, and in the recent Legacy of the Force series, have made fighters and gunships out of the rare metal.Blue MilkBlue Milk is a drink in Star Wars. In Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones and Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, blue milk is shown being served on the Lars moisture farm.  Blue milk is, as its somewhat basic name suggests, a dairy drink either naturally or artificially colored blue. The protein-enhanced beverage is served on planets low in natural resourcesespecially water.  Blue milk, coming from the teats of Banthas on Tatooine, is nutritious and has certain medicinal properties.BronziumBronzium is a durable bronze-colored metal used in the Wars universe. Its most notable use has been in the Trade Federation droideka battle droids, whose tough layers of bronzium armor supplemented by optional reflective deflector shielding and twin dual blasters make them formidable enemies.  It also appears as an armor type in KotOR II.Bronzium also is mentioned in the Alec Baldwin 1994 movie, The Shadow, as a metal so rare it is considered mythicalyet, in that film, a chemist was able to identify it in his basement lab and knew a considerable amount about its molecular structure.  It is supposedly so unstable that it could be used to make an atomic bomb.CortosisCortosis is a rare mineral from the Wars Expanded Universe. It is a somewhat fragile light grey, chalky rock that has the strange property of being impervious to both heat and energy.  It is highly resistant to blaster bolts, and cortosis alloys are capable of resisting or even deactivating Lightsabers, the only mineral to do so other than phrik and beskar. The process of mining cortosis requires the use of hydraulic jacks, since its properties render torches useless.(Karpyshyn, Darth Bane: Path of Destruction (2006). ISBN 0-345-47736-7)Cortosis is first mentioned in the Zahns Hand of Thrawn duology, and gradually adopted into the EU canon in later works. In Hand of Thrawn duology, Cortosis is described as causing a feedback loop with a lightsaber by shorting out the blade, requiring it to be reactivated (but not damaging it permanently).  In the duology, Luke Skywalker and Mara Jade are in fact able to cut their way through an outcropping of cortosis by hours of repeated lightsaber strokes and reactivations.  Later they encounter guard droids with an armor made up of alternating layers of cortosis and blaster-proof armor.  Many fans dispute the true nature of cortosis as both definitions have been included in established canon literature.  The sources that describe it as shorting out the lightsaber blade also describe it as a brittle mineral; bladed weapons used a cortosis alloy to incorporate the minerals lightsaber-blocking capabilities without its fragility.In Darth Bane: Path of Destruction Darth Bane was born on the world of Apatros, the planet on which Cortosis is mined.Cortosis is common in weaponry in the Star Wars universe.  Many melee weapons are made with a weave of cortosis to fight lightsaber bearing enemies.  In the ancient times of the Old Republic, during times of war with the Sith, it was common for fighters to carry cortosis-weave  vibroblades and vibroswords, which could be used to fight Jedi and Dark Jedi in close-range combat.  Sith in ancient times commonly carried a vibrosword rather than a lightsaber for two reasons, firstly, vibroblades would wound opponents in a more painful manner, due to the dicing way the vibroblades cut, secondly, vibriblade wounds are more prone to bleed-out, as the intense heat from lightsabers cauterizes any wound they make.In the game Jedi Outcast, Fyyar processes cortosis ore into a black armor that is used by his Shadowtroopers. He also builds a suit of armor that he uses himself.  It is unknown whether all cortosis ore deposits are capable of such processing; the ore Fyyar used was smuggled from City.Death sticksthumb|A rack of Death Sticks.Cilona-extract death sticks are fictional narcotic substances found in the Wars universe. They are relatively cheap, and are smuggled into the clubs of cities by slythmongers. The drug offers euphoria in exchange for a horrific outcome, producing a twisted version of reality enhanced by bright colors. With each dose the users life is shortened, and the successive dosages take away larger chunks from a lifespan. Death sticks are seen by some as a thinly-veiled reference to cigarettes.Usually, death sticks are taken as an additive to a drink and are commonly seen in small tubes of red or yellow liquid.  Death sticks are banned on all republic worlds, but are sold freely on lawless worlds such as Tatooine and other Outer Rim worlds, often exported to civilized worlds such as Coruscant where they are peddled by drug dealers.  The Bando Gora distributed a more potent and deadly form of death stick laced with a powerful neurotoxin until the cult was destroyed by Fett.Elan SelSabagno attempted to sell Jedi knight Kenobi death sticks in a nightclub on Coruscant, however he abruptly reconsidered under some Force-powered suggestion and went home to re-think his life. For more information see .DurasteelImage:Durasteel_galv_hole_close_up.jpg|thumb|right|Fictional Durasteel should not be confused with real Durasteel.Durasteel is one of the most used alloys in the Star Wars galaxy. It is a brown, heavy substance, yet very flexible and can resist heat, cold and monumental physical stress. Because of its properties, it was an important material for the manufacturing of spacecraft hulls. It was seen in Knights of the Old Republic and mentioned in the Jedi Apprentice book series as well as casual references throughout almost all of the books.Kaiburr crystalThe Kaiburr crystal is a fictional archaeological relic from the planet of Mimban. Local Mimban legend said that the god Pomojema used the crystal to heal the wounded, but in reality it was the Force that was responsible. The crimson-colored gem had the ability to enhance Force powers. The crystals mystical powers diminish proportional to its distance from an ancient temple on Mimban. The crystal is, however, the most powerful crystal that can be used in a lightsaber. They were normally used in the lightsabers in the old Jedi Order, but for unknown reasons the mines were lost, fading out of history and making the crystals extremely rare.In the 1978 novel of the Minds Eye (picture of the crystal on front cover), the old woman Halla along with companions Skywalker and Princess Leia sought out and found the crystal. It was used to heal the wounds of Princess Leia and of Luke after they had been injured. The crystal was then given to Halla, who had been searching for it for seven years.In Knights of the Old Republic II: The Sith Lords, the Exile and her companions could use the Kaiburr crystal to enhance their lightsabers. The crystal was described as the most powerful crystal that can be used in lightsaber construction.KoltoKolto is a highly effective healing agent, and the competitor to the medical fluid bacta. It is applied the same way in Wars: Knights of the Old Republic. Kolto is naturally found only on the planet Manaan, where the native Selkath mediate and sell it to both the Republic and to the Sith, not wanting to cause conflict. Kolto is found in a single, massive chasm at the bottom of the great ocean which completely covers Manaan. The main kolto deposit was guarded by a giant firaxa shark, which the Selkath named as the mythological Progenitor, legendary guardian and source of kolto itself. During the Civil War the Republic attempted to devise a procedure which would allow them to synthesize a kolto-like substance. This was not known to be successful, but a synthetic substance with similar properties, bacta, was eventually developed independently by the Vratix of Thyferra.During the course of Knights of the Old Republic it is possible that Revan could irreparably damage the kolto supply causing a galactic shortage by poisoning the water to kill the giant shark. However, this shortage is not carried into Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II.MembrosiaMembrosia is an alcoholic spirit of the Star Wars Universe. Normally gold-coloured, there is a type called Dark Membrosia which comes from the Dark Nest Killiks. Dark Nest Membrosia has a narcotic effect on insectoid species. The death of Alliance Supreme Commander Sien Sovv was brought about when his ship was hit by a tanker whose Vratix pilot had been drunk on Dark Nest Membrosia.The Name Membrosia could Be derived from the name, Ambrosia which is the food and drink of greek godsPermacretePermacrete is a substance used to pave roads and walkways. It is also often used in the construction of buildings. It was developed over 9000 years previous to the Battle of Yavin. Like Durasteel, permacrete is implied to be stronger than its real world equivalent. In KotOR I, the permacrete detonator is an extremely powerful bomb which the player can use to help a Twilek escape a bounty placed on his head by blowing up his entire apartment to make it look like he was killed.PhrikPhrik is a very dense alloy in Wars. It is able to resist lightsabers. General Grievous traveled with his droid bodyguards, a set of IG-100 series MagnaGuards, who wielded electrified staffs made of phrik. Darth Sidious lightsaber had a phrik alloy covering. The dark troopers also had body armor made of the alloy.Phrik is mined, as portrayed in Wars Droidworks. The alloy was also featured as a component in Dark Trooper manufacture in the game Forces.PlasteelPlasteel is a durasteel-reinforced plastic substance in Wars.  It is mentioned often in Star Wars books and in the Wars: Knights of the Old Republic video game series, in which many items can be found stored in plasteel cylinders.  The Imperial Stormtroopers well-known white armor was made of plasteel pressed thin enough to be worn comfortably, yet still able to provide total protection from melee and slug weapons.  Unfortunately, such thin plasteel cannot completely deflect blaster bolts.SpiceIn the fictional Wars universe, spice usually refers to an illegal stimulant drug.There are several different kinds of spice in the known galaxy; they are all grouped under the spice rubric not because of any chemical derivations, but rather because they spice up the user in some fashion, either temporarily boosting physical strength and stamina, making the user feel invincible, or heightening awareness or creating euphoria. These spiced up abilities do not last long and the user eventually needs another dose of the substance and quickly becomes addicted.Notable varietiesGlitterstimOne of the most common types of spice is glitterstim spice. Also known as glitterstim, it is a psychoactive substance harvested in the Wars universe, with both intoxicating and telepathic effects. Glitterstim is activated by light and consumed orally, crackling in the mouth in a manner much like Rocks. Glitterstim is only found on the planet Kessel.Although harvesting and dealing glitterstim was highly restricted under the authoritarian rule of the Galactic Empire, the Old Republic government did not presume that it was their role to prohibit it. One firm, authorized by Palpatine himself, was allowed to import glitterstim to Coruscant, among other worlds.  The prices were so astronomical that only elites like Grand Admiral Miltin Takel could afford to buy Wendell Wright-Sims wares.  Only highly experienced smugglers, such as Solo, even attempted to smuggle the substance past the many Imperial patrols despite the dangers.  Fear of the spice mines of Kessel was not confined to C-3PO.  The Run is a dangerous spice run from the planet Kessel, where glitterstim is harvested. A hole cluster near the system is a particularly perilous stretch of space to traverse, and only Han Solo piloting the legendary Falcon could pass close enough to the cluster in order to shave the distance down to a mere twelve parsecs. A black hole also shaved a portion of the Falcons ventral hull off, showing how narrowly Solo made it through the run.Glitterstim is actually the secretion of a crystalline, spider-like lifeform indigenous to the caves of Kessel. It must be harvested deep underground, away from any light, or else the drug will activate before it can be shipped off. Likewise, spice is usually carried in a tube with black paper on the sides, which allow for the user to peel off only the paper covering a dose of spice without activating the whole tube.Under the influence of glitterstim, the consumer may lose control of himself, much like someone who is drunk.  What makes glitterstim so widely sought after, however, is its ability to induce temporary telepathy. Lovers, warlords, and even spies have been known to make use of it. In fact, while imprisoned on Kessel, Han Solo was subjected to a mind probe by the leader of the Kessel spice mines, Moruth Doole, while Doole was under the influence of glitterstim.Han Solo began his running of glitterstim while working for the Tlanda Til (relatives of Hutts) on the planet Ylesia, where the Til ran a spice market controlled by the Hutts.CarsunumCarsunum was a rare and highly illegal spice variant mined on Sevarcos. Use of carsunum granted a boost of both mental and physical abilities as well as a pleasurable sense of well-being; however, once the spice hit ended, side effects could vary from jitters to death.The Guild used carsunum in some of its medical cures, and it is believed that carsunum was present onboard the fleet, possibly contributing to its disappearance.RyllRyll, mined on the planet Ryloth, is a relatively weak form of spice used to create a number of medicines used throughout the galaxy.  It is also smuggled into the Sector for illegal sale to the workers.  As a recreational substance, ryll can be addictive and dangerous.Ryll was one of the forms of spice processed on Ylesia prior to the Battle of Yavin.Ryll, specifically of the rarest variety, ryll kor, is instrumental in creating rylca, a medicine used to cure the deadly virus.StygiumStygium was a crystal only found on Aeten II. The Republic, in 22 BBY, passed a law controlling the trade of stygium, as it was a crystal that, when used properly, could entirely cloak a vehicle. In the Galactic Republics early years these devices were common, since Aeten II held an abundance of them. A notable later vehicle to utilize the crystals was the Scimitar, Mauls starfighter, which carried an array of stygium crystals in its long prow. During the events from the capture of the IV to the of Endor, Grand Admiral Martio Batch sent an Empire superweapon to Aeten II, the Tarkin. There, the Tarkin blew open the planet to reveal its stygium core. Using the crystals and the original stygium implementation, he started the Phantom TIE project. However, saboteurs from the Alliance destroyed the project and Batch fled. The stygium crystal cloakings disappeared after the creation of the New Republic, although they were still available from Aeten II. Stygium as a Lightsaber Crystal In its pure, crystal form it was known to be suitable for use as a lightsaber crystal. When a Force-sensitive individual was wielding a weapon with this crystal in it, he was somehow more gifted in natural stealth and dexterity.TibannaTibanna gas is a main export of City on Bespin. It is briefly mentioned in Empire Strikes Back, when Solo discovers that Calrissian is now running Cloud City, but its use was never revealed in the movie. The novels eventually explained it as a blaster gas, used in many small-arms laser weapons, and in the first Squadron game for the 64, Tibanna gas was noted as being used in the blasters of Imperial TIE Fighters as well as Rebel Fighters. Tibanna gas in a cooled, liquid form is also used as a coolant in hyperdrive engines, and its sale and distribution is regulated by the Imperial Mining guild. Semi-legal operators of illicit spacecraft seek out sources of Tibanna gas that are not regulated by Imperial authorities, so as to keep their operations secret. However, it is flammable, and must be handled with care.TransparisteelTransparisteel is a transparent metal alloy used in Wars. It is used to make windows and viewports on all manner of ground, air and spacecraft.Mesh tapeMesh tape  An adhesive tape made of very dense fibers and completely capable of making a seal strong enough to remain on a ship for years even with regular hyperspace jumps. The fibers used in Mesh tape are a titanium filament and aeromesh filament and a heavy durasteel layer filament making the tape difficult to work with but very versatile. It is most likely a reference to tape.Black AleBlack Ale a Mandalorian alcohol that is uncommonly found in the galaxy but is well known by Mandalorians.Black ale is a smooth sweet alcohol with a dark brown color and no smell.TihaarTihaar a strong Mandalorian spirit made with mixed fruit juices, and aged until its clear.UjalayiUjalayi also known as Uj Cake, is a Mandalorian dessert made with dried fruit and crushed nuts. Ujalayi is very sweet and soft, and usually is made in a disk-like patty.See also*of Star Trek materialsNotes and references*Star Wars: Specter of the Past 1st printing, 1997. Timothy Zahn. ISBN 0-553-29804-6 *Vision of the Future, 1st printing, 1998. Timothy Zahn. ISBN 0-553-10035-1 *Star Wars: I, Jedi, 1st edition, 1998. A. Stackpole, ISBN 0-553-57873-1*Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast, 2002 Computer Game *Wars: Obi-Wan Xbox Game*Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, 2003 Xbox and Computer Game*Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II: The Sith Lords, 2005 Xbox and Computer Game*The Essential guide to Planets and Moons (Star Wars), 1st edition, by Daniel Wallace, Scott Kolins. 1998. ISBN 0-345-42068-3*The Annotated Screenplays, softcover, 1997. Lucas, Leigh Brackett, Lawrence Kasdan, Laurent Bouzereau, ISBN 0-345-40981-7*Han Solo Trilogy by C. Crispin:**The Paradise Snare, 1st paperback printing, 1997. A. C. Crispin, ISBN 0-553-57415-9**The Hutt Gambit, 1st paperback printing, 1997. A. C. Crispin, ISBN 0-553-57416-7**Rebel Dawn, 1998. A.C. Crispin. ISBN 0-553-57417-5*Gamble, 1st paperback printing, 1996. Michael A. Stackpole, ISBN 0-553-56802-7*Search, 1994. Kevin J. Anderson, ISBN 0-553-29798-8*A Guide to the Star Wars Universe, 2nd edition, 1994. Bill Slavicsek, ISBN 0-345-38625-6*Wars Adventure Journal*of the Old Republic II: The Sith Lords*Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace*Crossbones*Phantom Menace Incredible Cross SectionsExternal links* - (this article is based on Wookieepedias)*Article on News mentioning stygium crystals*Entry by Dan Wallace on the official Star Wars site laying out the full Expanded Universe history of cloaks, weaving together the confusing stories of Grand Admiral Martio Batch, Admiral Thrawn and Zaarin, Assault 2, the Star Wars prequel materials, Fighter etc.*News story from the HoloNet*SWI Criminal Organizations & Spice Guide*ca:Ryllit:Bacta()
3907024
List_of_Acts_of_the_Parliament_of_the_United_Kingdom,_18401859
This is an incomplete list of Acts of the of the United Kingdom for the years 18401859.  Note that the first parliament of the United Kingdom was held in 1801; parliaments between 1707 and 1800 were either parliaments of Great Britain or of Ireland).  For Acts passed up until 1707 see of Acts of the Parliament of England and List of Acts of the Parliament of Scotland.  For Acts passed from 1707 to 1800 see of Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain.  See also the of Acts of the Parliament of Ireland.For Acts of the devolved parliaments and assemblies in the United Kingdom, see the of Acts of the Scottish Parliament from 1999, the of Acts of the Northern Ireland Assembly, and the of Acts and Measures of the National Assembly for Wales; see also the of Acts of the Parliament of Northern Ireland.The number shown after each Acts title is its chapter number. Acts passed before 1963 are cited using this number, preceded by the year(s) of the reign during which the relevant session was held; thus the Union with Ireland Act 1800 is cited as 39 & 40 Geo. 3 c. 67, meaning the 67th Act passed during the session that started in the 39th year of the reign of George III and which finished in the 40th year of that reign.  Note that the modern convention is to use numerals in citations (thus 41 Geo. 3 rather than 41 Geo. III).  Note also that Acts of the last session of the Parliament of Great Britain and the first session of the Parliament of the United Kingdom are both cited as 41 Geo. 3.  Acts passed from 1963 onwards are simply cited by calendar year and chapter number.All modern Acts have a title, e.g. the Local Government Act 2003.  Some earlier Acts also have a short title given to them by later Acts, such as by the Titles Act 1896.1840  18491840 (3 & 4 Vict.)Public General Acts* Court Act 1840 c. 65* for Public Works Act 1840 c. 10* Act 1840 c. 112* Taxes Act 1840 c. 38* Act 1840 c. 61* British North America Act 1840 c. 35* Canal Act 1840 c. 41* (Offences) Act 1840 c. 50* (Great Britain) Act 1840 c. 99* (Ireland) Act 1840 c. 100* Sweepers and Chimneys Regulation Act 1840 c. 85* Building Act 1840 c. 60* Discipline Act 1840 c. 86* Temporalities (Ireland) Act 1840 c. 101* Reserves in Canada Act 1840 c. 78* of Action of Trespass Act 1840 c. 24* and Boroughs (Ireland) Act 1840 c. 109* of Roscommon Act 1840 c. 76* Police Act 1840 c. 88* Houses (Ireland) Act 1840 c. 102* of Chancery Act 1840 c. 94* Act 1840 c. 19* Act 1840 c. 95* (Ireland) Act 1840 c. 105* Justices Act 1840 c. 103* on Glass Act 1840 c. 22* on Soap Act 1840 c. 49* India Trade Act 1840 c. 56* Commissioners Act 1840 c. 113* Courts Act 1840 c. 93* Sites Act 1840 c. 48* Act 1840 c. 26* (Scotland) Act 1840 c. 59* Bills Act 1840 c. 12* Bills Act 1840 c. 106* Act 1840 c. 17* Convention with France Act 1840 c. 69* Societies Act 1840 c. 73* Schools Act 1840 c. 77* Court of Admiralty (England) Act 1840 c. 66* Rates Act 1840 c. 98* Roads Act 1840 c. 104* Racing Act 1840 c. 5* Act 1840 c. 32* Act 1840 c. 31* Act 1840 c. 16* Felons Act 1840 c. 90* Prisoners Act 1840 c. 54* Debtors, India Act 1840 c. 80* Debtors (Ireland) Act 1840 c. 14* Debtors (Ireland) Act 1840 c. 107* of Man Harbours Act 1840 c. 63* Stock Companies Act 1840 c. 111* Act 1840 c. 82* Societies Act 1840 c. 110* Seatons Annuity Act 1840 c. 11* Police Act 1840 c. 30* Mutiny Act 1840 c. 8* Act 1840 c. 72* in Chancery Act 1840 c. 34* Police Courts Act 1840 c. 84* Thoroughfares Act 1840 c. 87* Ballots Suspension Act 1840 c. 71* Pay Act 1840 c. 70* Corporations (Ireland) Act 1840 c. 108* Act 1840 c. 6* East Indies Act 1840 c. 37* Debt Act 1840 c. 75* of Prince Albert Act 1840 c. 1* of Prince Albert Act 1840 c. 2* South Wales and Van Diemens Land Act 1840 c. 62* Gaol, Dublin Act 1840 c. 53* Registers Act 1840 c. 92* Fisheries (Scotland) Act 1840 c. 74* Elections Act 1840 c. 47* Elections Act 1840 c. 81* Papers Act 1840 c. 9* Ships Act 1840 c. 21* etc. Act 1840 c. 68* Law Commission Act 1840 c. 42* Rate Exemption Act 1840 c. 89* Office (Duties) Act 1840 c. 96* Alberts Annuity Act 1840 c. 3* Act 1840 c. 25* (Ireland) Act 1840 c. 44* Annes Bounty Act 1840 c. 20* Regulation Act 1840 c. 97* Act 1840 c. 52* of Blenheim Palace Act 1840 c. 43* Poddle Act 1840 c. 58* and Irish Paupers Act 1840 c. 27* Episcopal and other Clergy Act 1840 c. 33* Estates Drainage Act 1840 c. 55* Trade Suppression Act 1840 c. 64* Trade Suppression, Treaty with Venezuela Act 1840 c. 67* Act 1840 c. 79* Duties Act 1840 c. 23* Duties Act 1840 c. 57 * Act 1840 c. 4* Act 1840 c. 7* Manufacturers (Ireland) Act 1840 c. 91* Ships, British North America Act 1840 c. 36* Act 1840 c. 15* (Ireland) Act 1840 c. 13* Act 1840 c. 18* Acts Continuance Act 1840 c. 45* Acts, Ireland, Continuance Act 1840 c. 46* Act 1840 c. 39* Tolls Act 1840 c. 51* Act 1840 c. 83* Act 1840 c. 29* Rates in Boroughs Act 1840 c. 28* India Islands Relief Act 1840 c. 40Local Acts* Naval School Act 1840 c. lxxxvi18414 & 5 Vict.* of Slavery Act 1841 c. 18* to Lord Keane, etc. Act 1841 c. 1* of Highway Rates to Turnpikes Act 1841 c. 59* Act 1841 c. 53* in Personal Actions (Ireland) Act 1841 c. 17* Taxes Act 1841 c. 26* Notes Act 1841 c. 50* of Houses (Dublin) Act 1841 c. 10* Act 1841 c. 7* Elections Act 1841 c. 58* by Release Without Lease Act 1841 c. 21* Bridges Act 1841 c. 49* Houses (Ireland) Act 1841 c. 31* of Chancery Act 1841 c. 52* Purchase of Land Act 1841 c. 16* on Rum, etc. Act 1841 c. 8* Commissioners Act 1841 c. 39 * of Copyholds Act 1841 c. 35* Lands, etc. (Scotland) Act 1841 c. 24* Bills Act 1841 c. 19* Management Act 1841 c. 20 * Act 1841 c. 22 * Suits Act 1841 c. 28* Act 1841 c. 51* of Industry, etc. (Ireland) Act 1841 c. 41* of Arms, etc. (Ireland) Act 1841 c. 25* Act 1841 c. 11* Debtors (Ireland) Act 1841 c. 47* Societies Act 1841 c. 55* to South Australia Act 1841 c. 13* etc. (Scotland) Act 1841 c. 60* Mutiny Act 1841 c. 3* Improvements Act 1841 c. 40* Ballots Suspension Act 1841 c. 23* Pay Act 1841 c. 61* Monument to Sir Walter Scott Act 1841 c. 15* Corporations, Poor Rates Act 1841 c. 48* Act 1841 c. 2* South Wales, etc. Government Act 1841 c. 44* Survey Act 1841 c. 30 * Elections Act 1841 c. 57* Sites Act 1841 c. 38* Act 1841 c. 45* Act 1841 c. 34* from Coventry Street to Long Acre Act 1841 c. 12* of Punishments for Death Act 1841 c. 56* Duties Act 1841 c. 29* Act 1841 c. 4* Compositions (Ireland) Act 1841 c. 5* Compositions (Ireland) Act 1841 c. 37* Act 1841 c. 36* Partnerships Act 1841 c. 14 * Navigation Act 1841 c. 46* Acts Continuance Act 1841 c. 9* Roads (Ireland) Act 1841 c. 6* Tolls Act 1841 c. 33* Act 1841 c. 54* Act 1841 c. 32* Australia Government Act 1841 c. 43* Parish Act 1841 c. 42* House and Victoria Park Act 1841 c. 275 Vict.* Act 1841 c. 11* in Foreign Countries Act 1841 c. 6* etc., of Lunatics Act 1841 c. 4* Act 1841 c. 9* of Chancery Act 1841 c. 5* Lands Act 1841 c. 1* Law Continuance Act 1841 c. 7* House Act 1841 c. 2* Debt Act 1841 c. 8* Pay Act 1841 c. 3* Law Commission Act 1841 c. 101842 (5 & 6 Vict.)* for Public Works Act 1842 c. 9* Act 1842 c. 121* Acts Amendment Act 1842 c. 1* Treaty Act 1842 c. 40* Colonies, Waste Lands Act 1842 c. 36* Constitutions Act 1842 c. 76* Act 1842 c. 122* etc., in West Indies Act 1842 c. 4* Corn Act 1842 c. 92* Charters Confirmation Act 1842 c. 111* at Elections Act 1842 c. 102* Loan Guarantee Act 1842 c. 118* Punishment (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 28* Pawn Offices (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 75* Hospital Out-pensioners Act 1842 c. 70* Bill Decrees (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 33* Duties Act 1842 c. 49* of Certain Proceedings Act 1842 c. 43* Elections Act 1842 c. 73* Act 1842 c. 45* of Designs Act 1842 c. 100* of Chancery Act 1842 c. 103* Act 1842 c. 110* Act 1842 c. 47* Amendment Act 1842 c. 56* Act 1842 c. 94* Courts and Prisons Act 1842 c. 53* (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 89* Baronies Act 1842 c. 96* Police Act 1842 c. 24* Sale of Property Act 1842 c. 62* of Cornwall Leases, etc. Act 1842 c. 2* on Corn Act 1842 c. 14* on Spirit Mixtures, etc. Act 1842 c. 25* on Spirits, etc. Act 1842 c. 15* Districts in Forest of Dean Act 1842 c. 65* Houses of Residence Act 1842 c. 26* Jurisdiction Act 1842 c. 58* Leases Act 1842 c. 27* Leasing Act 1842 c. 108* Crown and Eton College Act 1842 c. 78* Bills Act 1842 c. 21* Bills Act 1842 c. 66* Bills Act 1842 c. 115* Court Act 1842 c. 86* Act 1842 c. 39* and Recoveries Act 1842 c. 32* Convention with France Act 1842 c. 63* (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 106* of Dean (Poor Relief) Act 1842 c. 48* Exchequer Bills Act 1842 c. 11* Courts Marshalsea (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 95* Certificates (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 81* Jury Presentments (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 77* etc., Election Act 1842 c. 31* Park Act 1842 c. 19* Tax Act 1842 c. 35* Tax (Foreign Dividends) Act 1842 c. 80* Act 1842 c. 10* Bishops Act 1842 c. 119* Debtors Act 1842 c. 116* Stock Banking Companies Act 1842 c. 85* (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 46* Tax Act 1842 c. 37* Act 1842 c. 44* of Actions and Costs Act 1842 c. 97* Societies Act 1842 c. 5* Bridge Act 1842 c. 64* Act 1842 c. 84* Asylums Act 1842 c. 87* etc., Police Act 1842 c. 117* Mutiny Act 1842 c. 13* Confirmation (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 113* Savings Banks Act 1842 c. 71* Ballots Suspension Act 1842 c. 72* Pay Act 1842 c. 90* and Collieries Act 1842 c. 99* Corporations Act 1842 c. 104* Act 1842 c. 12* Act 1842 c. 120* Gaol, Dublin Act 1842 c. 6* Apprentices Act 1842 c. 7* Constables Act 1842 c. 109* Property and Parish Debts Act 1842 c. 18* in Merchant Ships Act 1842 c. 107* Prison Act 1842 c. 29* of Testimony Act 1842 c. 69* Prison Act 1842 c. 67* Law Amendment Act 1842 c. 57* Rates Act 1842 c. 50* Act 1842 c. 98* Lunatic Asylums (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 123* Sessions Act 1842 c. 38* Prison Act 1842 c. 22* Passenger Duty Act 1842 c. 79* Regulation Act 1842 c. 55* of Lands, etc. (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 105* Malt for Colouring Beer Act 1842 c. 30* of St. Asaph and Bangor Act 1842 c. 112* Trade Suppression Act 1842 c. 42* Trade Suppression Act 1842 c. 59* Trade Suppression Act 1842 c. 91* Trade Suppression Act 1842 c. 101* Trade Suppression Act 1842 c. 114* Duties Allowances Act 1842 c. 16* Australia Act 1842 c. 61* Duties (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 82* Briavels Small Debts Court Act 1842 c. 83* Disfranchisement Act 1842 c. 52* Duties Act 1842 c. 34* Act 1842 c. 8* Manufactures (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 68* Ships, America Act 1842 c. 17* Act 1842 c. 54* Act 1842 c. 93* Act 1842 c. 51* with Hayti Act 1842 c. 41* Acts Continuance Act 1842 c. 60* Acts (Ireland) Act 1842 c. 23* of Dublin Registration Act 1842 c. 74* Diemens Land Act 1842 c. 3* Park Act 1842 c. 20* Australia Government Act 1842 c. 881843 (6 & 7 Vict.)* Lands Act 1843 c. 58* An Act to enable Her Majesty to provide for the Government of her Settlements on the Coast of Africa and in the Falkland Islands c. 13 - generally referred to as the British Settlements Act 1843* Duchess of Mecklenburgh Strelitz Act 1843 c. 25* of Offenders Act 1843 c. 34* Act 1843 c. 99* etc. (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 74* (Scotland) Act 1843 c. 61* (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 42* Subjects in China Act 1843 c. 80* Loan Societies (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 91* Hospital Act 1843 c. 31* Hospital Out-pensioners Act 1843 c. 95* at Limerick Act 1843 c. 88* Vendors Act 1843 c. 2* Evidence Act 1843 c. 22* Elections Act 1843 c. 47* Act 1843 c. 23* of Designs Act 1843 c. 65* Act 1843 c. 12* Act 1843 c. 83* of Queens Bench Act 1843 c. 20* Act 1843 c. 84* on Spirits Act 1843 c. 49* on Wheat, etc. Act 1843 c. 29* Jurisdiction Act 1843 c. 60* Act 1843 c. 85* by Commission Act 1843 c. 82* Bills Act 1843 c. 17* Court (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 55* Court (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 78* Act 1843 c. 75* Act 1843 c. 76* etc. (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 56* Jurisdiction Act 1843 c. 94* Exchequer Bills Act 1843 c. 1* Juries (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 32* Jury Presentments (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 71* Rates Act 1843 c. 59* Act 1843 c. 40* of Lords Oath Act 1843 c. 6* Bishops Act 1843 c. 62* Act 1843 c. 9* Committee Act 1843 c. 38* (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 8* of Holyrood Park, etc. Act 1843 c. 64* Tax, Assessed Tax, and Income Tax Act 1843 c. 24* Act 1843 c. 96* of Action Act 18 c. 54* Societies Act 1843 c. 41* Hackney Carriages Act 1843 c. 86* Mutiny Act 1843 c. 4* Confirmation (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 39* Ballots Suspension Act 1843 c. 43* Pay Act 1843 c. 70* Prison Act 1843 c. 26* Corporations (England) Act 1843 c. 89* Corporations (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 93* Act 1843 c. 3* Parishes Act 1843 c. 37* Island Act 1843 c. 35* Elections (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 28* Voters Registration Act 1843 c. 18* Rates Act 1843 c. 48* Relief (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 92* Act 1843 c. 30* Notaries Act 1843 c. 90* Works (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 44* of Death Act 1843 c. 10* of Certain Bishops (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 57* Fisheries Act 1843 c. 33* Societies Act 1843 c. 36* Fisheries Act 1843 c. 79* of the Peace, Dublin Act 1843 c. 81* Trade Act 1843 c. 46* Trade Act 1843 c. 98* Trade Treaties Act 1843 c. 50* Trade Treaties Act 1843 c. 51* Trade Treaties Act 1843 c. 52* Trade Treaties Act 1843 c. 53* Trade Treaties with Bolivia, Texas, Uruguay Act 1843 c. 14* Trade Treaties with Bolivia, Texas, Uruguay Act 1843 c. 15* Trade Treaties with Bolivia, Texas, Uruguay Act 1843 c. 16* Act 1843 c. 73* Act 1843 c. 72* Bribery Commission Act 1843 c. 97* Disfranchisement Act 1843 c. 11* Duties Act 1843 c. 27* Act 1843 c. 5* Act 1843 c. 87* House Court and Little St. Jamess Street, Westminster Act 1843 c. 19* Act 1843 c. 68* Act 1843 c. 7* Acts 1843 c. 69* Acts (Ireland) Act 1843 c. 21* Act 1843 c. 45* of Attorney Act 1843 c. 66* Cathedrals Act 1843 c. 77* Indies Relief Act 1843 c. 63* of Mandamus Act 1843 c. 671844 (7 & 8 Vict.)* for Gaming Act 1844 c. 3* for Gaming Act 1844 c. 58* Offences Act 1844 c. 2* Act 1844 c. 66* Act 1844 c. 104* Act 1844 c. 93* Between Debtors and Creditors Act 1844 c. 70* Unions Indemnity Act 1844 c. 109* (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 23* Taxes, Property Tax, and Duty on Pensions and Offices of Profit Act 1844 c. 46* Constitutions Act 1844 c. 74* Charter Act 1844 c. 32* of Farm Buildings Act 1844 c. 62* and Cheese Trade Act 1844 c. 48* Donations and Bequests (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 97* Loan Societies (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 38* Building (Banns and Marriages) Act 1844 c. 56* of the Crown in Chancery Act 1844 c. 77* of Woods (Audit) Act 1844 c. 89* Law Offices (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 107* Elections Act 1844 c. 103* Lands Act 1844 c. 55* Act 1844 c. 92* (Detached Parts) Act 1844 c. 61* Dublin Grand Jury Act 1844 c. 106* Rates Act 1844 c. 33* in India Act 1844 c. 18* Act 1844 c. 16* Act 1844 c. 43* Act 1844 c. 73* of Sudbury Act 1844 c. 53* Courts and Prisons Act 1844 c. 50* of Cornwall Act 1844 c. 65* of Cornwall (No. 2) Act 1844 c. 105* Courts Act 1844 c. 68* Debt Act 1844 c. 20* Bills Act 1844 c. 14* Act 1844 c. 96* Factories Act 1844 c. 15* (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 108* of Dean Act 1844 c. 13* Regrating, etc. Act 1844 c. 24* Transactions Act 1844 c. 7* and Silver Wares Act 1844 c. 22* Canal Branches (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 98* Act 1844 c. 100* Metropolis Act 1844 c. 1* Tax Act 1844 c. 39* Act 1844 c. 10* Courts Act 1844 c. 19* Copyright Act 1844 c. 12* Stock Banks Act 1844 c. 113* Stock Companies Act 1844 c. 110* (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 90* Committee Act 1844 c.  69* Act 1844 c. 87* Tax Commissions Act 1844 c. 79* and Parish Clerks Act 1844 c. 59* of Time Act 1844 c. 27* Manufactures (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 47* Societies Act 1844 c. 54* Mutiny Act 1844 c. 11* (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 81* Seamen Act 1844 c. 112* Metropolitan Buildings Act 1844 c. 84* Sessions Act 1844 c. 71* Ballots Suspension Act 1844 c. 35* Pay Act 1844 c. 75* Act 1844 c. 9* Debt Act 1844 c. 4* Debt Act 1844 c. 5* Debt Act 1844 c. 64* Debt Act 1844 c. 80* Parishes Act 1844 c. 94* Parishes (Scotland) Act 1844 c. 44* South Wales Act 1844 c. 72* Poaching Act 1844 c. 29* Chapels Act 1844 c. 45* Constables Act 1844 c. 52* Processions (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 63* Act 1844 c. 88* Law Amendment Act 1844 c. 101* Rates Act 1844 c. 40* Horse Licence Duties (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 67* Office (Duties) Act 1844 c. 49* (Scotland) Act 1844 c. 34* Regulation Act 1844 c. 85* of Advowsons in Ireland Act 1844 c. 27* Catholics Act 1844 c. 102* Fisheries (Scotland) Act 1844 c. 95* Bank Act 1844 c. 83* Sites Act 1844 c. 37* and Irish Paupers Removal Act 1844 c. 42* Trade Act 1844 c. 26* Duties Allowances Act 1844 c. 51* (Clerks) Act 1844 c. 86* Wales Turnpike Trusts Act 1844 c. 91* (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 82* Act 1844 c. 21* Magistrate for Manchester Act 1844 c. 30* Duties Act 1844 c. 28* Act 1844 c. 6* of Schools (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 8* Square Act 1844 c. 60* Navigation and Harbour Act 1844 c. 99* of Property Act 1844 c. 76* Acts, Great Britain Act 1844 c. 41* Acts (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 36* South Wales Act 1844 c. 91* Oaths (Ireland) Act 1844 c. 78* Act 1844 c. 25* of Foreign Goods, Manchester Act 1844 c. 31* Indian Islands Relief Act 1844 c. 17* Australia Government Act 1844 c. 571845 (8 & 9 Vict.)Public General Acts* of Offices in Courts of Law Act 1845 c. 78* Act 1845 c. 130* Unions Indemnity Act 1845 c. 57* Taxes Act 1845 c. 36* Act 1845 c. 15* in Error Act 1845 c. 68* Notes (Scotland) Act 1845 c. 38* (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 37* Act 1845 c. 48* Act 1845 c. 10* Corn Act 1845 c. 103* and Watch Rates Act 1845 c. 110* Carriers Act 1845 c. 42* Tolls Act 1845 c. 28* Criminal Lunatic Asylum (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 107* Export Duties Repeal Act 1845 c. 7* Taxing Master (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 115* Building Act 1845 c. 70* Duty, London Act 1845 c. 101* of Customs Act 1845 c. 85* Clauses Consolidation Act 1845 c. 16* Clauses Consolidation ( Scotland ) Act 1845* near Public Works (Scotland) Act 1845 c. 3* of Real Property Act 1845 c. 119* of Drogheda and Meath Act 1845 c. 121* Rates Act 1845 c. 111* of Chancery Act 1845 c. 105* Lands Act 1845 c. 99* Act 1845 c. 12* Act 1845 c. 84* Act 1845 c. 86* Act 1845 c. 92* Court, Westminster Act 1845 c. 104* Stealing Act 1845 c. 47* (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 69* Grand Jury Act 1845 c. 81* of Customs Act 1845 c. 90* on Spirits Act 1845 c. 65* on Sugar Act 1845 c. 13* Patronage (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 51* Act 1845 c. 113* Bills Act 1845 c. 23* Bills Act 1845 c. 129* Act 1845 c. 120* Lane, Greenwich Act 1845 c. 22* (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 108* Act 1845 c. 109* Fees Abolition Act 1845 c. 114* Survey Act 1845 c. 63* Duties Repeal Act 1845 c. 6* Securities (Scotland) Act 1845 c. 31* Act 1845 c. 71* Rates Act 1845 c. 59* etc. (Scotland) Act 1845 c. 41* Act 1845 c. 77* Inclosure Act 1845 c. 118* Tax Act 1845 c. 4* Act 1845 c. 24* Act 1845 c. 35* of Man Trade Act 1845 c. 94* Stock Companies (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 98* Committee Act 1845 c. 30* (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 67* Drainage Act 1845 c. 56* Clauses Consolidation Act 1845 c. 18* Clauses Consolidation ( Scotland ) Act 1845 c. 19* Act 1845 c. 124* Act 1845 c. 75* Societies Act 1845 c. 60* Act 1845 c. 74* Act 1845 c. 100* Act 1845 c. 126* Stipendiary Magistrate Act 1845 c. 21* Mutiny Act 1845 c. 9* College Act 1845 c. 25* Seaman Act 1845 c. 116* Savings Bank Act 1845 c. 27* Ballots Suspension Act 1845 c. 58* Pay Act 1845 c. 82* of County Rates, Middlesex Act 1845 c. 32* Offices Act 1845 c. 52* Act 1845 c. 43* Act 1845 c. 8* Debt Act 1845 c. 62* Medical Supplemental Fund Society Act 1845 c. 123* Schoolmasters (Scotland) Act 1845 c. 40* (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 54* Ships Act 1845 c. 14* Law (Scotland) Act 1845 c. 83* Rates Act 1845 c. 79* Removal Act 1845 c. 117* of Smuggling Act 1845 c. 87* Works Act 1845 c. 29* of Works of Art, etc. Act 1845 c. 44* Funds Act 1845 c. 97* Sessions (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 80* Colleges (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 66* (Sales and Leases) Act 1845 c. 96* Clauses Consolidation Act 1845 c. 20* Clauses Consolidation ( Scotland ) Act 1845 c. 33* Property Act 1845 c. 106* of British Vessels Act 1845 c. 89* Act 1845 c. 76* Gaol Act 1845 c. 72* Terms Act 1845 c. 112* Office in Courts of Queens Bench and Common Pleas Act 1845 c. 34* Wales Act 1845 c. 11* etc. Act 1845 c. 88* and Holyhead Road Act 1845 c. 73* Weavers Act 1845 c. 128* H. Pottingers Annuity Act 1845 c. 49* Slave Trade, Brazil Act 1845 c. 122* Debts Act 1845 c. 127* Constables (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 46* (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 64* Act 1845 c. 2* Duties Act 1845 c. 5* Act 1845 c. 1* Ships Act 1845 c. 45 * of British Possessions Act 1845 c. 93* (Scotland) Act 1845 c. 26* Acts Continuance Act 1845 c. 53* Acts (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 125* Trusts., South Wales Act 1845 c. 61* Oaths (Ireland) Act 1845 c. 55* Act 1845 c. 102* Arrestment (Scotland) Act 1845 c. 39* of Goods Act 1845 c. 91* Lands, Van Diemens Land Act 1845 c. 95* India Island Relief Act 1845 c. 50Local Acts* Naval School Act 1845 c. xxii1846 (9 & 10 Vict.)Public General Acts* Lord Gough Act 1846 c. 32* Lord Hardinge Act 1846 c. 31* Act 1846 c. 116* Unions Act 1846 c. 48* Taxes and Income Tax Act 1846 c. 56* and Washhouses Act 1846 c. 74* and Washhouses (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 87* Bridge and Embankment, etc. Act 1846 c. 39* Park Act 1846 c. 38* Trading Act 1846 c. 17* Criminal Court Act 1846 c. 24* Building (Burial Service in Chapels) Act 1846 c. 68* Patronage Act 1846 c. 88* (Scotland) Act 1846 c. 67* Port of London Act 1846 c. 36* (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 97* Commission Act 1846 c. 53* (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 37* Courts (England) Act 1846 c. 95* Works (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 2* Works (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 71* Works (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 78* Appointments, Colonies Act 1846 c. 91* Act 1846 c. 23* Act 1846 c. 58* Act 1846 c. 94* Act 1846 c. 102* Act 1846 c. 62* (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 4* and Distress (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 111* of Members for Cheshire Act 1846 c. 44* Bills Act 1846 c. 15* Trading (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 76* Accidents Act 1846 c. 93* (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 6* (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 3* (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 114* Societies Act 1846 c. 27* of New Zealand Act 1846 c. 103* Jury Cess Act 1846 c. 60* Rates Act 1846 c. 49* of Commons Offices Act 1846 c. 77* Importation Act 1846 c. 22 (Corn Laws)* Act 1846 c. 70* Act 1846 c. 16* Act 1846 c. 117* Tax Act 1846 c. 81* Act 1846 c. 13* Debtors, India Act 1846 c. 14* (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 64* Stock Banks (Scotland and Ireland) Act 1846 c. 75* (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 112* Societies Act 1846 c. 52* for Public Works (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 85* for Public Works (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 108* Acts, Preliminary Inquiries Act 1846 c. 106* Asylums, etc. Act 1846 c. 84* Asylums (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 79* Asylums (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 115* Injuries by Fire, etc. Act 1846 c. 25* Mutiny Act 1846 c. 12* (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 72* Buildings Act 1846 c. 5* Ballots Suspension Act 1846 c. 43* Pay Act 1846 c. 55* Act 1846 c. 11* Debt Act 1846 c. 8* and Military Accounts Act 1846 c. 92* Medical Supplemental Fund Society Act 1846 c. 69* Street from Spitalfields to Shoreditch Act 1846 c. 34* Zealand Company Act 1846 c. 42* Zealand Company Act 1846 c. 82* Zealand Constitution Act 1846* Constitution Act 1846 c. 45* Removal, etc. Act 1846 c. 96* Survey Act 1846 c. 46* Payment Act 1846 c. 10* Services Act 1846 c. 9* Deposits Act 1846 c. 20* Elections Act 1846 c. 30* Elections (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 19* Act 1846 c. 98* Employment (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 107* Rates Act 1846 c. 50* Removal Act 1846 c. 66* in Common Pleas Act 1846 c. 54* Works Act 1846 c. 18* (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 61* and Mandamus (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 113* Money Drainage Act 1846 c. 101* Works Advances (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 109* Works (Ireland) (No. 1) Act 1846 c. 1* Works (Ireland) (No. 2) Act 1846 c. 86* Works Loans Act 1846 c. 80* Works Loans Act 1846 c. 83* Companies Dissolution Act 1846 c. 28* Regulation (Gauge) Act 1846 c. 57* Commissioners Act 1846 c. 105* Property (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 110* Disabilities Act 1846 c. 59* Act 1846 c. 40* Meeting Act 1846 c. 33* Navigation Act 1846 c. 100* Licences Act 1846 c. 90* Magistrate, Staffordshire Act 1846 c. 65* Duties Act 1846 c. 29* Duties Act 1846 c. 41* Duties Act 1846 c. 63* Act 1846 c. 7* Act 1846 c. 47* Act 1846 c. 73* Act 1846 c. 26* Acts, Great Britain Act 1846 c. 51* Roads (Ireland) Act 1846 c. 89* Hardinges Annuity Act 1846 c. 21* Lands, Australia Act 1846 c. 104* Australia Government Act 1846 c. 35* and Salvage Act 1846 c. 99Local Acts* Sluice Drainage Act 1846 c. ccxcviii1847 (10 & 11 Vict.)* for Railways (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 73* Act 1847 c. 83* Act 1847 c. 107* etc. Act 1847 c. 102* and Washhouses Act 1847 c. 61* Burgh Police, etc. (Scotland) Act 1847 c. 39* Civil List Act 1847 c. 71* (Carriers) Act 1847 c. 94* Clauses Act 1847 c. 65* and Greenwich Out-pensioners Act 1847 c. 54* Pensions (Abolition of Poundage) Act 1847 c. 4* Copyright Act 1847 c. 95* Clauses Act 1847 c. 16* Commission Act 1847 c. 101* Duties Act 1847 c. 1* Buildings Act 1847 c. 28* Charters (Scotland) Act 1847 c. 51* Act 1847 c. 23* of Spirits from Sugar Act 1847 c. 6* etc. (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 106* (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 79* on Buckwheat, etc. Act 1847 c. 3* on Corn, etc. Act 1847 c. 64* Commissioners Act 1847 c. 108* Jurisdiction Act 1847 c. 98* of Poor Act 1847 c. 87* of Poor, etc. (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 80* Bills Act 1847 c. 19* Act 1847 c. 29* (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 22* Clauses Act 1847 c. 15* Register House, Edinburgh Act 1847 c. 20* of Newfoundland Act 1847 c. 44* Docks, and Piers Clauses Act 1847 c. 27* Securities (Scotland) Act 1847 c. 50* Rates Act 1847 c. 93* Harbour Act 1847 c. 76* of Commons Costs Taxation Act 1847 c. 69* Act 1847 c. 2* Act 1847 c. 86* Act 1847 c. 111* Act 1847 c. 25* Act 1847 c. 18* Constabulary Act 1847 c. 100* Stock Companies Act 1847 c. 78* Offenders Act 1847 c. 82* Drainage Act 1847 c. 38* Drainage (Scotland) Act 1847 c. 113* for Prisons (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 26* Property Improvement (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 32* Harbour and Docks Act 1847 c. 114* Societies Act 1847 c. 53* Bridge Approaches Fund Act 1847 c. 115* Asylums Act 1847 c. 43* Asylum (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 40* Improvement Fund (Scotland) Act 1847 c. 91* Mutiny Act 1847 c. 13* and Fairs Clauses Act 1847 c. 14* of Jews and Quakers Act 1847 c. 58* in Chancery Act 1847 c. 60* in Chancery Act 1847 c. 97* Ballots Suspension Act 1847 c. 68* Pay Act 1847 c. 88* Fisheries (Scotland) Act 1847 c. 92* Act 1847 c. 12* Debt Act 1847 c. 9* Deserters Act 1847 c. 62* Mutiny Act 1847 c. 59* Service of Boys Act 1847 c. 30* Zealand Act 1847 c. 112* Elections (Soldiers) Act 1847 c. 21* Act 1847 c. 103* and Harbours (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 75* at Elections (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 81* Law Board Act 1847 c. 109* Rates Act 1847 c. 77* Relief (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 7* Relief (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 10* Relief (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 31* Relief (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 55* Relief (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 99* Relief (Ireland) (No. 2) Act 1847 c. 90* Removal Act 1847 c. 33* Removal Act 1847 c. 110* Natal Act 1847 c. 56* Breakwater Act 1847 c. 24* Office (Duties) Act 1847 c. 85* Works Act 1847 c. 70* Removal (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 45* Money Drainage Act 1847 c. 11* Passenger Duty Act 1847 c. 42* Peers (Scotland) Act 1847 c. 52* Marines Act 1847 c. 63* of Heirs (Scotland) Act 1847 c. 47* Land (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 46* Navigation Act 1847 c. 74* Duties Allowances Act 1847 c. 41* Wales Turnpike Roads Act 1847 c. 72* to Loan Act 1847 c. 36* in Brewing Act 1847 c. 5* Act 1847 c. 8* Letters, etc. Act 1847 c. 66* of Service in the Army Act 1847 c. 37* Act 1847 c. 104* Police Clauses Act 1847 c. 89 pdf* Improvement Clauses Act 1847 c. 34* of Lands (Scotland) Act 1847 c. 48* of Lands (Scotland) Act 1847 c. 49* Act 1847 c. 67* Relief Act 1847 c. 96* Acts, Great Britain Act 1847 c. 105* Roads (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 35* (Ireland) Act 1847 c. 84* Diemens Land Company Act 1847 c. 57* Clauses Act 1847 c. 171848 (11 & 12 Vict.)* Act 1848 c. 20* on Civil Bills, Dublin Act 1848 c. 34* Act 1848 c. 126* Prize Money Act 1848 c. 103* Manors Award Act 1848 c. 83* Release Act 1848 c. 86* Warehouses Act 1848 c. 122* Police Act 1848 c. 14* Canal Act 1848 c. 54* Union Act 1848 c. 56* and Greenwich Out-pensioners, etc. Act 1848 c. 84* Building Act 1848 c. 37* Building Commission Act 1848 c. 71* (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 72* Disorders (Sheep), etc. Act 1848 c. 107* Cess. (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 32* Law Procedure Act 1848 c. 31* of Chancery Act 1848 c. 10* of Chancery Offices Act 1848 c. 94* Procedure Act 1848 c. 46* Cases Act 1848 c. 78* Lands Act 1848 c. 102* Recovery Act 1848 c. 87* of Norwich Act 1848 c. 61* Relations with See of Rome Act 1848 c. 108* of Freemen, Great Yarmouth Act 1848 c. 24* of Spirits from Sugar, etc. Act 1848 c. 100* Police Act 1848 c. 113* on Copper and Lead Act 1848 c. 127* on Spirits Act 1848 c. 60* Jurisdiction Act 1848 c. 67* Patronage (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 76* Unions, etc. (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 41* Petitions Act 1848 c. 98* Recognizances Act 1848 c. 18* Amendment Act 1848 c. 36* (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 47* of Crown Advowsons Act 1848 c. 57* Bills Act 1848 c. 16* Act 1848 c. 118* (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 28* (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 131* and Recoveries Act 1848 c. 70* (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 92* of New Zealand Act 1848 c. 5* Jury Cess. (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 26* Corpus Suspension (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 35* Act 1848 c. 29* (Scotland) Act 1848 c. 30* Rates Act 1848 c. 66* of Sheep Act 1848 c. 105* Act 1848 c. 99* Act 1848 c. 109* (Provisional Orders) Act 1848 c. 27* Tax Act 1848 c. 8* of Boroughs Act 1848 c. 93* Estates (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 48* Act 1848 c. 19* Insolvency Act 1848 c. 21* Offences Act 1848 c. 42* Debtors, Court Act 1848 c. 77* Reproductive Loan Fund Act 1848 c. 115* of Tobago, etc. Act 1848 c. 22* Stock Companies Act 1848 c. 45* Protection Act 1848 c. 44* (Scotland) Act 1848 c. 79* Offenders (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 59* Poor (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 106* Tax Commissioners Act 1848 c. 62* Transfer (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 120* Act 1848 c. 121* Societies Act 1848 c. 64* Acts, Preliminary Inquiries Act 1848 c. 129* Houses Act 1848 c. 101* Bridge Approaches Act 1848 c. 124* Injuries (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 69* Mutiny Act 1848 c. 15* Metropolitan Commissioners of Sewers Act 1848 c. 112* Ballots Suspension Act 1848 c. 65* Pay Act 1848 c. 75* Prison Act 1848 c. 104* Leases (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 13* Act 1848 c. 11* Debt Act 1848 c. 125* Monument in Scotland Act 1848 c. 23* Medical Supplement Fund Society Act 1848 c. 58* Removal, etc. Act 1848 c. 123* Elections Act 1848 c. 90* to North America Act 1848 c. 6* General Act 1848 c. 55* Law Amendment Act 1848 c. 110* Law Audit Act 1848 c. 91* Law Auditors Act 1848 c. 114* Law (Schools) Act 1848 c. 82* Rates Act 1848 c. 85* Relief (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 25* Removal Act 1848 c. 111* Office Act 1848 c. 117* Office (Money Orders) Act 1848 c. 88* of Crime (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 2* Act 1848 c. 39* Public Health Act 1848 c. 63* Money Drainage Act 1848 c. 119* Works (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 1* Works (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 17* Works (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 51* Prison Act 1848 c. 7* Act 1848 c. 3* Quadrant Colonnade Act 1848 c. 50* of Sasines (Scotland) Act 1848 c. 74* and Bridges (Scotland) Act 1848 c. 40* of Beer, etc. on Sunday Act 1848 c. 49* Fisheries Act 1848 c. 52* Banks (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 133* Trade Act 1848 c. 116* Trade (Muscat) Act 1848 c. 128* Duties Act 1848 c. 9* Navigation Act 1848 c. 81* Duties Act 1848 c. 97* Jurisdiction Act 1848 c. 43* Act 1848 c. 33* Act 1848 c. 4* Masters (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 132* Rentcharge (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 80* Felony Act 1848 c. 12* Relief (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 68* Acts Continuance Act 1848 c. 96* Acts (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 73* Combinations (Ireland) Act 1848 c. 89* India Loans Act 1848 c. 38* Indian Loans Act 1848 c. 130* Castle Act 1848 c. 53* Parish Act 1848 c. 951849 (12 & 13 Vict.)Public General Acts* Offences (Colonial) Act 1849 c. 96* Act 1849 c. 98* Enlistment Act 1849 c. 73* (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 38* (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 107* Law Consolidation Act 1849 c. 106* Relief from County Expenditure Act 1849 c. 82* Assizes Act 1849 c. 6* of Ease, etc. (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 99* Act 1849 c. 41* Inland Post Office Act 1849 c. 66* Marriages Act 1849 c. 68* Cess. (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 36* Courts Act 1849 c. 101* Rates within Boroughs Act 1849 c. 65* to Animals Act 1849 c. 92* Act 1849 c. 90* for Rates Act 1849 c. 14* of Lands Act 1849 c. 100* Collection of Rates Act 1849 c. 91* Corporation Act 1849 c. 85* Improvement Act 1849 c. 97* Jurisdiction Act 1849 c. 39* Bills Act 1849 c. 20* Jury Cess. (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 32* Markets Act 1849 c. 28* (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 4* Corpus Suspension (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 2* Rates Act 1849 c. 54* Returns Act 1849 c. 35* of Commons Offices Act 1849 c. 72* of Lords Costs Taxation Act 1849 c. 78* of Land (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 23* Act 1849 c. 57* Act 1849 c. 83* Act 1849 c. 7* Estates (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 77* Act 1849 c. 9* Offences (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 69* Revenue Board Act 1849 c. 1* Revenue Officers Act 1849 c. 58* Stock Companies Act 1849 c. 108* (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 95* Factors Act 1849 c. 51* of the Peace Small Debts (Scotland) Act 1849 c. 34* Protection (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 16* Grants, New South Wales Act 1849 c. 22* Property Improvement (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 59* Act 1849 c. 11* Act 1849 c. 110* Act 1849 c. 26* Societies Act 1849 c. 37* Asylums (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 56* Mutiny Act 1849 c. 12* Sewers Act 1849 c. 93* Great Western Railway Act 1849 c. 62* Ballots Suspension Act 1849 c. 52* Pay Act 1849 c. 75* Act 1849 c. 10* etc., East Indies Act 1849 c. 43* Act 1849 c. 29* Forest and Waltham Forest Act 1849 c. 81* Zealand Company Act 1849 c. 79* Act 1849 c. 21* Gaol, Dublin, etc. Act 1849 c. 55* Removal, etc. Act 1849 c. 111* Against Women Act 1849 c. 76* Act 1849 c. 33* Bag Act 1849 c. 109* Sessions Act 1849 c. 18* Act 1849 c. 88* (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 60* Law Amendment Act 1849 c. 103* Law (Justices Jurisdiction) Act 1849 c. 64* Law (Overseers) Act 1849 c. 8* Rates Act 1849 c. 61* Relief Act 1849 c. 13* Relief (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 104* Deserters Act 1849 c. 25* Removal (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 19* Health Supplemental Act 1849 c. 94* Sessions Act 1849 c. 45* in Aid of Distressed Unions Act 1849 c. 24* of Wages (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 15* Benefit Societies Act 1849 c. 71* of Distress (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 5* of Distress (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 63* Leasehold Conversion Act 1849 c. 105* Pavilion, Brighton, etc. Act 1849 c. 102* Sites Act 1849 c. 49* Act 1849 c. 67* Act 1849 c. 50* Stealers (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 30* of Westmorland Act 1849 c. 42* Trade Act 1849 c. 84* Duties Allowances Act 1849 c. 40* (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 53* (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 17* Act 1849 c. 80* Convictions (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 70* Act 1849 c. 3* Act 1849 c. 44* (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 27* Instruments (Signature) Act 1849 c. 89* Relief Act 1849 c. 74* Acts Continuance Act 1849 c. 87* Acts (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 47* Roads (Scotland) Act 1849 c. 31* of Turnpike Trusts Act 1849 c. 46* Island Act 1849 c. 48* (Ireland) Act 1849 c. 86Local Acts* Sluice Drainage (Amendment) Act 1849 c. lix* of London Municipal Elections Act 1849 c. xciv1850  18591850 (13 & 14 Vict.)* of Railways Act 1850 c. 83* Turnpike Acts Continuance Act 1850 c. 79* to Duke and Princess Mary of Cambridge Act 1850 c. 77* Act 1850 c. 107* Taxes Composition Act 1850 c. 96* (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 85* of Goods (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 73* Constitutions Act 1850 c. 59* Justices Act 1850 c. 91* Licensing Act 1850 c. 67* Duties Repeal Act 1850 c. 9* Act 1850 c. 64* (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 4* Association (New Zealand) Act 1850 c. 70* Great Britain Act 1850 c. 53* (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 44* Mines Inspection Act 1850 c. 100* Prisons Act 1850 c. 39* of Designs Act 1850 c. 104* of Dublin Act 1850 c. 55* Cess. (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 1* Courts Act 1850 c. 61* of Chancery (England) Act 1850 c. 35* of Chancery (Ireland) Regulation Act 1850 c. 89* of Chancery of Lancaster Act 1850 c. 43* of Common Pleas Act 1850 c. 75* of Session Act 1850 c. 36* and Outrage (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 106* to Animals (Scotland) Act 1850 c. 92* Act 1850 c. 95* (Manchester Bonding) Act 1850 c. 84* Unions Advances (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 14* of Deanery of Saint Burian Act 1850 c. 76* Corporation Act 1850 c. 81* Commissioners Act 1850 c. 94* Jurisdiction Act 1850 c. 47* Company Act 1850 c. 63* Bills Act 1850 c. 10* Bills Act 1850 c. 22* Equitable Jurisdiction (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 51* Factories Act 1850 c. 54* and Market Act 1850 c. 23* (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 88* Societies Act 1850 c. 115* Jury Cess. (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 82* Hospital Act 1850 c. 24* Rates Act 1850 c. 58* Harbour Act 1850 c. 111* of Land (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 113* Act 1850 c. 8* Act 1850 c. 66* of Boroughs Act 1850 c. 42* Act 1850 c. 12* Act 1850 c. 21* Mortgage (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 29* Registry (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 74* of Assizes Act 1850 c. 25* Act 1850 c. 37* Act 1850 c. 17* Act 1850 c. 105* etc., Manufactures (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 48* Societies Act 1850 c. 45* Bridge Approaches Act 1850 c. 103* Hackney Carriages Act 1850 c. 7* Corrib Act 1850 c. 112* Mutiny Act 1850 c. 6* House Settlement Act 1850 c. 78* Confirmation Act 1850 c. 38* Marine Act 1850 c. 93* Interments Act 1850 c. 52* Ballots Suspension Act 1850 c. 46* Pay Act 1850 c. 49* Act 1850 c. 5* Gallery and Museums (Scotland) Act 1850 c. 86* Prize Act 1850 c. 40* Pay Act 1850 c. 62* Constables Act 1850 c. 20* of Manchester Division Act 1850 c. 41* Elections (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 68* Processions (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 2* Act 1850 c. 26* Act 1850 c. 27* Act 1850 c. 98* Police (Scotland) Act 1850 c. 33* Superannuation Fund Act 1850 c. 87* Law Amendment Act 1850 c. 101* Rates Act 1850 c. 50* Harbour Act 1850 c. 116* Health Supplemental Act 1850 c. 32* Health Supplemental (No. 2) Act 1850 c. 90* Health Supplemental (No. 3) Act 1850 c. 108* Libraries Act 1850 c. 65* Money Drainage Act 1850 c. 31* of Small Tenements Act 1850 c. 99* of Assurances (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 72* Congregations, etc. (Scotland) Act 1850 c. 13* of Part of 15 George 3. c. 31 Act 1850 c. 80* of the People (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 69* Banks (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 110* Districts Act 1850 c. 11* and Cattle Disease Prevention Act 1850 c. 71* of Westmorland Act 1850 c. 30* Improvements Act 1850 c. 109* Duties (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 114* Duties Act 1850 c. 97* Jurisdiction ( Ireland ) Act 1850 c. 102* Act 1850 c. 3* Court (England) Act 1850 c. 16* Court (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 18* Court (Ireland) Act 1850 c. 19* Act 1850 c. 60* Appointment Act 1850 c. 28* Acts (Ireland) Continuance Act 1850 c. 34* Act 1850 c. 56* Act 1850 c. 57* Indian Courts of Appeal Act 1850 c. 151851 (14 & 15 Vict.)Public General Acts* The Debtors Arrest Act 1851 c. 52 (This short title authorised by section 12)* The Inclosure Act 1851 c. 2 (This short title authorised by section 2)* The Turnpike Acts Continuance Act 1851 c. 37 (This short title authorised by section 3)* of Vice-Chancellor Act 1851 c. 4* Act 1851 c. 101* Act 1851 c. 13* Taxes Act 1851 c. 33* Park Act 1851 c. 77* (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 21* Association (New Zealand) Act 1851 c. 84* (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 15* (Service of Notice) Act 1851 c. 56* Justices Salary Act 1851 c. 41* Building Act 1851 c. 97* of Ireland Act 1851 c. 72* of Ireland Acts Repeal Act 1851 c. 71* Bill Courts (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 57* The (Port of London) Act 1851 c. 78 (This short title authorised by section 49)* The Lodging Houses Act 1851 c. 28 (This short title authorised by section 1)* Law Courts (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 17* Householders Act 1851 c. 14* (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 85* of Chancery Act 1851 c. 83* Justice Administration Act 1851 c. 55* Procedure Act 1851 c. 100* The Estate Paving Act 1851 c. 95 (This short title authorised by section 5)* Lands (Copyholds) Act 1851 c. 46* Lands Act 1851 c. 42* Act 1851 c. 62* Jurisdiction Act 1851 c. 29* Property Valuation (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 74* Titles Act 1851 c. 60* from Scotland Act 1851 c. 91* and Capitular Estates Act 1851 c. 104* Act 1851 c. 99* Bills Act 1851 c. 9* Rents (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 20* The Act (Ireland) 1851 c. 90 (This short title authorised by section 20)* (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 73* Jury Cess. (Dublin) Act 1851 c. 65* Seal Act 1851 c. 82* in Mersey Act 1851 c. 67* Forest Act 1851 c. 43* Fishery Act 1851 c. 26* The Peak Mining Customs and Mineral Courts Act 1851 c. 94 (This short title authorised by section 1)* Roads and Bridges Act 1851 c. 66* Rates Act 1851 c. 30* South Wales Act 1851 c. 16* Tax Act 1851 c. 36* Commissioners Act 1851 c. 53* Tax Act 1851 c. 12* Act 1851 c. 10* The Classes Lodging Houses Act 1851 c. 34 (This short title authorised by section 1)* and Tenant Act 1851 c. 25* for Mills (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 7* Societies Act 1851 c. 31* for Public Works (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 51* Asylums (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 45* Removal (India) Act 1851 c. 81* Mutiny Act 1851 c. 5* India Act 1851 c. 40* The Marine Act Amendment Act 1851 c. 96 (This short title authorised by section 1)* Interment Act 1851 c. 89* The Market Act 1851 c. 61 (This short title authorised by section 43)* Sewers Act 1851 c. 75* Ballots Suspension Act 1851 c. 32* Pay Act 1851 c. 58* Act 1851 c. 6* Apprentices (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 35* Brunswick Boundary Act 1851 c. 63* Forest Act 1851 c. 76* Zealand Settlements Act 1851 c. 86* by Sea Act 1851 c. 1* The Sessions (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 93 (This short title authorised by section 45)* Law (Apprentices, etc.) Act 1851 c. 11* Law Amendment Act 1851 c. 105* Rates Act 1851 c. 47* Relief (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 68* The Inquiries Act 1851 c. 49 (This short title authorised by section 8)* of Offences Act 1851 c. 19* (Scotland) Act 1851 c. 27* The of Inventions Act 1851 c. 8 (This short title authorised by section 10) * The Health Supplemental Act for Great Yarmouth 1851 c. 80 (This short title authorised by section 4)* The Health Supplemental Act, 1851, No. 2 c. 98 (This short title authorised by section 14)* The Health Supplemental Act 1851 (No. 3) c. 103 (This short title authorised by section 7)* Works Loans Act 1851 c. 23* Regulation Act 1851 c. 64* The Act (Ireland) 1851 c. 70 (This short title authorised by section 1)* of Small Tenements Act 1851 c. 39* Peers (Scotland) Act 1851 c. 87* of Arsenic Regulation 1851 c.13 pdf* Sites Act 1851 c. 24* The Fund Winding-up Act 1851 c. 102 (This short title authorised by section 1)* The Annual Inclosure Act 1851 c. 54 (This short title authorised by section 2)* etc., Diseases Act 1851 c. 69* Duties Allowances Act 1851 c. 59* (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 88* Albans Bribery Commission Act 1851 c. 106* Act 1851 c. 18* The Navigation Act 1851 c. 79 (This short title authorised by section 51)* The Jurisdiction (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 92 (This short title authorised by section 29)* Act 1851 c. 3* Great Britain Act 1851 c. 22* Rating Act 1851 c. 50* Acts Continuance (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 44* Trusts: Making of Provisional Orders Act 1851 c. 38* Oaths (Ireland) Act 1851 c. 48Local Acts* Naval School Amendment Act 1851 c. xxix185215 & 16 Vict.* Act 1852 c. 82* Act 1852 c. 77* Custom House Act 1852 c. 30* of Quebec Act 1852 c. 53* of Christ Church, New Zealand Act 1852 c. 88* (Scotland) Act 1852 c. 32* Act 1852 c. 85* Bishops Act 1852 c. 52* of Works Act 1852 c. 28* Law Courts Act 1852 c. 73* Law Procedure Act 1852 c. 76* Act 1852 c. 51* Courts Act 1852 c. 54* Rates Act 1852 c. 81* of Chancery Act 1852 c. 80* of Chancery Act 1852 c. 87* of Chancery Procedure Act 1852 c. 86* and Outrage (Ireland) Act 1852 c. 66* Lands Act 1852 c. 62* Revenues (Colonies) Act 1852 c. 39* Duties on Foreign Ships Act 1852 c. 47* of St. Albans Act 1852 c. 9* Unions (Ireland) Act 1852 c. 68* Jurisdiction Act 1852 c. 17* Commissioners Act 1852 c. 57* of Intestates, etc. Act 1852 c. 3* (Scotland) Act 1852 c. 27* Bills Act 1852 c. 10* Public Health Supplemental Act 1852 c. 42* Deserters Act 1852 c. 26* Societies Act 1852 c. 65* Register Office Act 1852 c. 25* Rates Act 1852 c. 19* Prison Act 1852 c. 70* Burial Ground Act 1852 c. 41* Act 1852 c. 79* Act 1852 c. 2* Tax Act 1852 c. 20* Estates (Ireland) Act 1852 c. 67* Act 1852 c. 4* and Provident Societies Act 1852 c. 31* Revenue Office Act 1852 c. 40* Copyright Act 1852 c. 12* Jurisdiction Act 1852 c. 38* Common Act 1852 c. 29* Property Improvement (Ireland) Act 1852 c. 34* etc., Manufacturers (Ireland) Act 1852 c. 13* Societies Act 1852 c. 15* Mutiny Act 1852 c. 8* of Parliament Act 1852 c. 23* Water Act 1852 c. 84* Sewers Act 1852 c. 64* Act 1852 c. 50* Ballots Suspension Act 1852 c. 75* Pay Act 1852 c. 74* Corporations Act 1852 c. 5* Act 1852 c. 7* Pay Act 1852 c. 46* Zealand Constitution Act 1852 c. 72* Oaths Act 1852 c. 43* Act 1852 c. 44* Law Amendment Act 1852 c. 83* etc., under Excise Acts 1852 c. 61* Act 1852 c. 56* Improvements Act 1852 c. 78* Law Boards (England) Act 1852 c. 59* Law Commission (Ireland) Act 1852 c. 37* Law Union Charges Act 1852 c. 14* Rates Act 1852 c. 18* of Lunatics Act 1852 c. 48* of Inventions Act 1852 c. 6* Dissenters Act 1852 c. 36* Health Supplemental (No. 2) Act 1852 c. 69* of Advances (Ireland) Act 1852 c. 16* Peers (Scotland) Act 1852 c. 35* Banks Act 1852 c. 60* Sites Act 1852 c. 49* etc., Disorders Prevention Act 1852 c. 11* Act 1852 c. 21* Act 1852 c. 1* Embankment Act 1852 c. 71* Act 1852 c. 55* Acts, Great Britain Act 1852 c. 58* Acts (Ireland) Act 1852 c. 22* Debts Act 1852 c. 33* Roads in Yorkshire Act 1852 c. 45* (Ireland) Act 1852 c. 63* Act Amendment Act 1852 c. 2416 & 17 Vict.* Notes Act 1852 c. 2* and Notes, Metropolis Act 1852 c. 1* Act 1852 c. 3* American Loans Guarantee Act 1852 c. 41853 (16 & 17 Vict.)Public General Acts* of Certain Offenders Act 1853 c. 118* Act 1853 c. 110* in Error Act 1853 c. 32* Composition (Scotland) Act 1853 c. 63* (Scotland) Act 1853 c. 53* Court Act 1853 c. 81* Park Act 1853 c. 47* Borough Extension Act 1853 c. 114* Courts Act 1853 c. 27* Act 1853 c. 119* Council Elections (Scotland) Act 1853 c. 26* Harbours ( Scotland ) Act 1853 c. 93* Act 1853 c. 134* and Treatment of Lunatics Act 1853 c. 96* Churches, etc. Act 1853 c. 35* Trusts Act 1853 c. 137* College of Brecknock Act 1853 c. 82* Reserves, Canada Act 1853 c. 21* (Colonial Offences) Act 1853 c. 48* Bishops Act 1853 c. 49* for Oaths Act 1853 c. 78* Law Procedure Amendment (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 113* Lodging House Act 1853 c. 41* of Marriages Act 1853 c. 122* Annuities (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 75* Diseases (Animals) Act 1853 c. 62* Prisons Act 1853 c. 121* Prisoners Removal, etc. Act 1853 c. 43* etc., Commission Act 1853 c. 124* Act 1853 c. 57* Elections (Scotland) Act 1853 c. 28* of Chancery (England) Act 1853 c. 98* of Chancery Examiners Act 1853 c. 22* and Outrage (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 72* Procedure Act 1853 c. 30* Lands Act 1853 c. 56* Act 1853 c. 54* Act 1853 c. 106* Consolidation Act 1853 c. 107* the Coin Act 1853 c. 102* and Improvement of Lands (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 130* Carriage Act 1853 c. 112* Parliamentary Revising Act 1853 c. 58* on Horses Let for Hire Act 1853 c. 88* on Spirits, etc. Act 1853 c. 37* Commissioners (Exchange of Patronage) Act 1853 c. 50* Jurisdiction Act 1853 c. 108* Amendment Act 1853 c. 94* Amendment Act 1853 c. 83* (Scotland) Act 1853 c. 20* Bills Act 1853 c. 25* Act 1853 c. 104* Annuities Act 1853 c. 45* of India Act 1853 c. 95* Jury (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 136* Jury Cess. (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 13* Rates Act 1853 c. 66* Act 1853 c. 11* Act 1853 c. 120* Tax Act 1853 c. 34* Tax (Insurance) Act 1853 c. 91* Estates (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 64* Act 1853 c. 14* of Friendly Societies Act 1853 c. 123* Tax Commissioners (Appointment) Act 1853 c. 111* Tax Redemption Act 1853 c. 74* Tax Redemption (No. 2) Act 1853 c. 117* Tax Redemption (Investment) Act 1853 c. 90* (Scotland) Act 1853 c. 67* etc., Manufacturers (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 103* Societies Act 1853 c. 109* Hackney Carriage Act 1853 c. 33* Hackney Carriage (No. 2) Act 1853 c. 127* Regulation Act 1853 c. 70* Asylums Act 1853 c. 97* Injuries (Northern Ireland) Act 1853 c. 38* Mutiny Act 1853 c. 10* Shipping Law Amendment Act 1853 c. 131* Improvements Act 1853 c. 18* Sewers Act 1853 c. 125* Act 1853 c. 133* Pay Act 1853 c. 116* Corporations (England) Act 1853 c. 79* Act 1853 c. 9* Debt Act 1853 c. 23* Debt Act 1853 c. 132* Enlistment Act 1853 c. 69* Volunteers Act 1853 c. 73* Forest Deer Removed Act 1853 c. 19* Act 1853 c. 71* Elections Act 1853 c. 68* Elections (Polling) Act 1853 c. 15* Act Amendment Act 1853 c. 84* Law Act 1853 c. 5* Law Act 1853 c. 115* Servitude Act 1853 c. 99* Law Amendment Act 1853 c. 129* Improvement Act 1853 c. 44* Law Union Charges Act 1853 c. 77* Rates Act 1853 c. 105* Council Registrar Act 1853 c. 85* Order Confirmation (Turnpike Debts) Act 1853 c. 61* Health Supplemental (No. 1) Act 1853 c. 24* Health Supplemental (No. 2) Act 1853 c. 126* Libraries Act 1853 c. 101* Works Loans Act 1853 c. 40* Magistrates (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 60* Courts (Scotland) Act 1853 c. 80* (Scotland) Act 1853 c. 92* Leone Act 1853 c. 86* Trade Suppression, Treaties with Sohar and New Granada Act 1853 c. 16* Trade Suppression, Treaties with Sohar and New Granada Act 1853 c. 17* Abatement, London Act 1853 c. 128* Duties Repeal Act 1853 c. 39* House Act 1853 c. 8* and Shoreditch New Street Act 1853 c. 52* Act 1853 c. 59* Duty Act 1853 c. 51* Act 1853 c. 12* Act 1853 c. 31* Officer (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 55* Embankment Act 1853 c. 87* of Aids Act 1853 c. 6* Acts (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 76* Roads (England) Act 1853 c. 135* (Scotland) Act 1853 c. 89* Act 1853 c. 100* (Ireland) Act 1853 c. 7* Act 1853 c. 65* in Sales of Bullion Act 1853 c. 29* Bridge Act 1853 c. 46* Disafforesting Act 1853 c. 36* Disafforesting Act 1853 c. 42Local Acts* Waterworks Act 1853 c. cvii1854 (17 & 18 Vict.)Public General Acts* of Deeds by Married Women Act 1854 c. 75* to County of Mayo Act 1854 c. 110* Act to repeal the Laws relating to Usury and to the Enrolment of Annuities 1854 c. 90* Act 1854 c. 121* Taxes Act 1854 c. 1* of Witnesses Act 1854 c. 34* of Benefices Act 1854 c. 84* (Scotland) Act 1854 c. 73* Act 1854 c. 119* of Sale Act 1854 c. 36* of Sale (Ireland) Act 1854 c. 55* Rates (England) Act 1854 c. 71* Survey (Ireland) Act 1854 c. 17* Act 1854 c. 87* Building Act 1854 c. 32* Building Commission Act 1854 c. 14* Temporalities Act 1854 c. 11* Trade Act 1854 c. 5* Law Procedure Act 1854 c. 125* Legislative Council for Canada Act 1854 c. 118* of Marriages Act 1854 c. 88* Prisons Act 1854 c. 76* Practices Prevention Act 1854 c. 102* Courts Act 1854 c. 16* of Admiralty Act 1854 c. 78* of Chancery Act 1854 c. 100* of Chancery of Lancaster Act 1854 c. 82* and Outrage (Ireland) Act 1854 c. 92* Land, Revenues Act 1854 c. 68* to Animals Act 1854 c. 60* Act 1854 c. 28* Act 1854 c. 29* Act 1854 c. 122* Act 1854 c. 67* Amended Carriage Act 1854 c. 45* of Cornwall Office Act 1854 c. 93* Courts Act 1854 c. 47* Jurisdiction Act 1854 c. 65* and Capitular Estates Act 1854 c. 116* Bills Act 1854 c. 3* Bills Act 1854 c. 12* Bonds and Bills Act 1854 c. 23* Act 1854 c. 27* Societies Act 1854 c. 101* Societies Discharge Act 1854 c. 56* Houses Act 1854 c. 38* and Silver Wares Act 1854 c. 96* of India Act 1854 c. 77* Securities (Scotland) Act 1854 c. 62* Rates Act 1854 c. 52* Act 1854 c. 69* South Wales Act 1854 c. 7* Harbours Act 1854 c. 44* Act 1854 c. 97* Act 1854 c. 9* Act 1854 c. 48* Tax Act 1854 c. 10* Tax Act 1854 c. 24* Tax Act 1854 c. 40* Act 1854 c. 39* and Provident Societies Act 1854 c. 25* Loan Act 1854 c. 54* Trials (Scotland) Act 1854 c. 59* Assessed, and Income Taxes Act 1854 c. 85* Valuation (Scotland) Act 1854 c. 91* etc., Manufacturers (Ireland) Act 1854 c. 46* and Scientific Institutions Act 1854 c. 112* Mutiny Act 1854 c. 6* Chapels Act 1854 c. 70* Shipping Act 1854 c. 104* Shipping Repeal Act 1854 c. 120* Sewers Act 1854 c. 111* Great Western Railway Act 1854 c. 124* Act 1854 c. 13* ( Ireland ) Act 1854 c. 107* ( Scotland ) Act 1854 c. 106* Ballots Suspension Act 1854 c. 108* Law Amendment Act 1854 c. 105* Pay Act 1854 c. 109* Act 1854 c. 4* Gallery of Ireland Act 1854 c. 99* Pay, etc. Act 1854 c. 19* Forest Act 1854 c. 49* University Act 1854 c. 81* Schoolmaster (Scotland) Act 1854 c. 98* Law Board Act 1854 c. 41* Law Board (Ireland) Act 1854 c. 63* Law Union Charges Act 1854 c. 43* Rates Act 1854 c. 66* of Dublin Act 1854 c. 22* Act, Russia, 1854 c. 18* Order Confirmation (Turnpikes) Act 1854 c. 51* Health Act 1854 c. 95* Health Supplemental Act 1854 c. 53* Libraries (Scotland) Act 1854 c. 64* Revenue and Consolidated Fund Charges Act 1854 c. 94* Statues (Metropolis) Act 1854 c. 33* and Canal Traffic Act 1854 c. 31* Estate Charges Act 1854 c. 113* Schools (Scotland) Act 1854 c. 74* of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Scotland) Act 1854 c. 80* of Prisoners in Custody Act 1854 c. 115* Officers Act 1854 c. 57* Military Asylum, Chelsea Act 1854 c. 61* Government Securities Act 1854 c. 123* of Beer, etc. Act 1854 c. 79* Banks and Friendly Societies Act 1854 c. 50* and Sheriff Clerk of Chancery (Scotland) Act 1854 c. 72* (Ireland) Act 1854 c. 89* Act 1854 c. 83* Magistrate, Manchester and Salford Act 1854 c. 20* Duties Act 1854 c. 30* Act 1854 c. 2* Act 1854 c. 21* Towns Improvement (Ireland) Act 1854 c. 103* (Ireland) Act 1854 c. 26* between Devonport and Keyham Act 1854 c. 15* Acts (Ireland) Act 1854 c. 42* Roads (England) Act 1854 c. 58* of London Medical Graduates Act 1854 c. 114* of Certain Proceedings, etc. Act 1854 c. 37* (Ireland) Act 1854 c. 8* Assizes Act 1854 c. 35* Indian Incumbered Estates Act 1854 c. 117* Offenders, Great Britain Act 1854 c. 86Local Acts*and Midland Institute c.xci1855 (18 & 19 Vict.)* (Scotland) Act 1855 c. 25* (Lord and Lady Raglan) Act 1855 c. 64* Act 1855 c. 129* Enlistment Act 1855 c. 4* Waste Lands Act 1855 c. 56* of Lading Act 1855 c. 111* Act 1855 c. 128* Grounds (Scotland) Act 1855 c. 68* Trusts Amendment Act 1855 c. 124* Passengers Act 1855 c. 104* Ports Act 1855 c. 48* Mines Act 1855 c. 108* for Oaths Act 1855 c. 42* of Assize in County Palatine of Lancaster Act 1855 c. 45* Law Procedure (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 7* of Marriages Act 1855 c. 66* with United States Act 1855 c. 77* etc., Commission Act 1855 c. 52* of Chancery Act 1855 c. 134* of Exchequer (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 50* in Prince of Wales Island and India Act 1855 c. 93* and Outrage (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 112* Justice Act 1855 c. 126* Lands Act 1855 c. 16* Suits Act 1855 c. 90* Act 1855 c. 21* Tariff Act 1855 c. 97* Speaker Act 1855 c. 84* Prevention Act 1855 c. 116* Street Public Offices Extension Act 1855 c. 95* and Improvement of Lands (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 110* Amended Carriage Act 1855 c. 65* and Other Roads Turnpikes Abolition Act 1855 c. 69* of Lancaster Lands Act 1855 c. 58* for the Working Classes (Scotland) Act 1855 c. 88* Courts Act 1855 c. 41* Jurisdiction Act 1855 c. 75* Property (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 28* of Pauper Children Act 1855 c. 34* Schools Inquiries (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 59* of Foreigners Act 1855 c. 2* Bills Act 1855 c. 8* Bills and Bonds Act 1855 c. 130* Act 1855 c. 94* Duties Act 1855 c. 22* Convention with France Act 1855 c. 101* Treaty with United States Act 1855 c. 3* of Pleading in High Court Act 1855 c. 26* Societies Act 1855 c. 63* Board of Health Continued Act 1855 c. 115* College Act 1855 c. 53* of Commons Act 1855 c. 10* Burial Ground Act 1855 c. 89* Act 1855 c. 14* Act 1855 c. 61* Tax Act 1855 c. 20* Tax (Insurance) Act 1855 c. 35* of Brighton Act 1855 c. 31* Estates (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 73* Act 1855 c. 49* Settlements Act 1855 c. 43* Revenue Act 1855 c. 78* Moveable Succession (Scotland) Act 1855 c. 23* Liquors Act 1855 c. 118* Bridge (Treasury Grant) Act 1855 c. 113* of Tobago Loan Act 1855 c. 107* Act 1855 c. 15* Dwellings Act 1855 c. 132* Powers for Religious Worship in (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 39* of Religious Worship Act 1855 c. 86* (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 62* Liability Act 1855 c. 133* Act 1855 c. 13* Regulation Act 1855 c. 105* Asylums Repayment of Advances (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 109* Mutiny Act 1855 c. 12* Shipping Amendment Act 1855 c. 91* Management Act 1855 c. 120* Building Act 1855 c. 122* Sewers Act 1855 c. 30* Act 1855 c. 1* Act 1855 c. 57* Ballot System Act 1855 c. 106* (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 19* Pay Act 1855 c. 123* Act 1855 c. 11* Debt Act 1855 c. 18* Gallery of Ireland Act 1855 c. 44* Museum of Industry for Scotland and General Register House Act 1855 c. 80* South Wales Constitution Act 1855 c. 54* Act 1855 c. 27* Removal (England) Act 1855 c. 121* of the Militia Act 1855 c. 100* Ordnance Board Transfer Act 1855 c. 117* University Act 1855 c. 36* Elections (Scotland) Act 1855 c. 24* Act 1855 c. 119* of Worship Registration Act 1855 c. 81* (Burials) Act 1855 c. 79* Law Union Charges Act 1855 c. 47* Rates Act 1855 c. 51* Lunatic Asylums (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 76* Order Confirmation (Turnpikes) Act 1855 c. 102* Health Supplemental Act 1855 c. 125* Houses (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 114* Libraries Act 1855 c. 70* Libraries (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 40* of Ledbury Act 1855 c. 92* of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Scotland) Act 1855 c. 29* Loan Act 1855 c. 17* Grants Act 1855 c. 131* Trade Suppression, African Treaty Act 1855 c. 85* of Wine Act 1855 c. 38* (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 103* Act 1855 c. 32* Procedure on Bills of Exchange Act 1855 c. 67* Customs Consolidation Act 1855 c. 96* Act 1855 c. 5* Act 1855 c. 6* Act 1855 c. 37* Duties Act 1855 c. 9* of Counties (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 74* College, Dublin Act 1855 c. 82* Loan Act 1855 c. 99* Acts (Great Britain) Act 1855 c. 98* Acts (Ireland) Act 1855 c. 83* of Benefices, etc. Act 1855 c. 127* of Proceedings in the House of Commons Act 1855 c. 33* Constitution Act 1855 c. 55* Rings Act 1855 c. 60* and Measures Act 1855 c. 72* India Loans Act 1855 c. 71* Forest Act 1855 c. 46* Offenders Act 1855 c. 871856 (19 & 20 Vict.)* of Intestates Estates Act 1856 c. 94* to Sir W. F. Williams Act 1856 c. 30* Act 1856 c. 105* Composition Act 1856 c. 20* (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 79* of London and Durham Act 1856 c. 115* Voters Registration (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 58* Grounds (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 98* University Act 1856 c. 88* Companys Amendment Act 1856 c. 23* Criminal Court Act 1856 c. 16* Appeal Court (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 92* Receivers (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 77* Building Commissioners (Transfer of Powers) Act 1856 c. 55* Service Act 1856 c. 83* of Supply (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 93* Law Procedure Amendment (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 102* of Marriages Act 1856 c. 70* Diseases, Animals Act 1856 c. 101* Practices Act 1856 c. 84* Tenant (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 65* and Borough Police Act 1856 c. 69* Courts Act 1856 c. 108* Justice Act 1856 c. 118* Baron of the Exchequer Act 1856 c. 86* Act 1856 c. 75* Securities (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 91* Forest Act 1856 c. 13* on Bankers Act 1856 c. 25* (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 62* Hospitals Act 1856 c. 110* on Racehorses Act 1856 c. 82* Dept Act 1856 c. 116* etc., Estates Management Act 1856 c. 74* Bills Act 1856 c. 19* Bills and Bonds Act 1856 c. 44* Court (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 56* Duties Act 1856 c. 34* Act 1856 c. 38* Tribunals Evidence Act 1856 c. 113* of Deeds (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 89* Board of Health Act 1856 c. 85* Juries Act 1856 c. 54* Jury (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 63* and Straw Act 1856 c. 114* Revenues Act 1856 c. 43* of Commons Offices Act 1856 c. 1* (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 46* Act 1856 c. 11* Act 1856 c. 106* Tax Act 1856 c. 33* Estates (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 67* Act 1856 c. 73* and Provident Societies Act 1856 c. 40* Stock Banks Act 1856 c. 100* Stock Banks (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 3* Stock Companies Act 1856 c. 47* (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 48* Convict Prison (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 24* Asylums Act 1856 c. 87* Asylums, Superannuations, Ireland , Act 1856 c. 99* Court of Saint Sepulchre Abolition Act 1856 c. 57* Mutiny Act 1856 c. 8* and Registration Act 1856 c. 119* (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 96* Law Amendment Act 1856 c. 97* Law Amendment Act (Scotland) 1856 c. 60* Management Amendment Act 1856 c. 112* Police Act 1856 c. 2* Ballots Suspension Act 1856 c. 52* Pay Act 1856 c. 90* Endowed School Act 1856 c. 53* Act 1856 c. 10* Debt Act 1856 c. 5* Debt Act 1856 c. 6* Debt Act 1856 c. 21* Gallery Act 1856 c. 29* Parishes Act 1856 c. 104* Removal (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 103* of Greenwich and Chelsea Hospitals Act 1856 c. 15* Colleges, etc., Estates Act 1856 c. 95* University Act 1856 c. 31* Act 1856 c. 27* Preservation, Ireland , Act 1856 c. 36* Law Commissioners (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 14* Law (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 117* Rates Act 1856 c. 42* (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 68* Health Supplemental Act 1856 c. 26* Money Drainage Act 1856 c. 9* Works Act 1856 c. 17* Works (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 18* (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 72* etc., Schools Act 1856 c. 109* Schools (Scotland) Act 1856 c. 28* of Obsolete Statutes Act 1856 c. 64* (Transfer of Charges) Act 1856 c. 59* of Way Near Aldershot Camp Act 1856 c. 66* Catholic Charities Act 1856 c. 76* of Advowsons Act 1856 c. 50* Loan Act 1856 c. 39* Savings Bank Act 1856 c. 41* Estates Act 1856 c. 120* Abatement, London Act 1856 c. 107* Mary Magdalen Hospital, Bath Act 1856 c. 45* Act 1856 c. 22* Act 1856 c. 81* Poges Hospital Act 1856 c. 111* Act 1856 c. 4* Act 1856 c. 7* Act 1856 c. 61* Act 1856 c. 80* of Works (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 37* Acts, Great Britain Act 1856 c. 49* Acts (Ireland) Continuance 1856 c. 71* Trusts Act 1856 c. 12* Oaths (Ireland) Act 1856 c. 78* of Rice in Distillation Act 1856 c. 51* India Relief Commissioners Act 1856 c. 35* Disafforesting Act 1856 c. 32185720 Vict.* to Right Honourable Charles Shaw Lefevre Act 1857 c. 9* Act 1857 c. 20* of Supply (Scotland) Act 1857 c. 11* etc., Commission Act 1857 c. 8* Police Act 1857 c. 2* Act 1857 c. 15* on Racehorses Act 1857 c. 16* Jurisdiction Act 1857 c. 10* Bills Act 1857 c. 17* Places Act 1857 c. 19* of Military, etc., Commissions Act 1857 c. 4* Pursuant to Report of Inclosure Commissioners Act 1857 c. 5* Tax Act 1857 c. 6* Act 1857 c. 7* of Towns (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 12* Mutiny Act 1857 c. 14* Act 1857 c. 13* Act 1857 c. 18* Health Supplemental Act 1857 c. 3* Marines Act 1857 c. 120 & 21 Vict.* Princess Royal Act 1857 c. 2* Act 1857 c. 69* and Insolvent Act 1857 c. 60* and Real Securities ( Scotland ) Act 1857 c. 19* Chamber Procedure Act 1857 c. 18* of Hanley Act 1857 c. 10* of Burghs Extension (Scotland) Act 1857 c. 70* Survey (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 45* Act 1857 c. 81* Grounds (Scotland) Act 1857 c. 42* Canal Act 1857 c. 27* Lands Purchase Act 1857 c. 30* Ports Act 1857 c. 1* of London Burial Act 1857 c. 35* Service Superannuation Act 1857 c. 37* Attornies Relief Act 1857 c. 39* of Marriages Act 1857 c. 29* (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 17* Courts Act 1857 c. 36* of Exchequer Chamber (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 6* of Probate Act 1857 c. 77* of Session Act 1857 c. 56* Suits (Scotland) Act 1857 c. 44* Act 1857 c. 62* and Excise Act 1857 c. 61* Revising Barristers Act 1857 c. 68* College Act 1857 c. 84* Harbour Loan Act 1857 c. 63* and Capitular Estates Act 1857 c. 74* Board of Health Act 1857 c. 38* Lands Leasing Powers ( Ireland ) Act 1857 c. 47* Jury Cess. (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 7* Jury (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 15* Distillation (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 40* Act 1857 c. 31* Act 1857 c. 20* Tax Act 1857 c. 5* Schools Act 1857 c. 48* Stock Banking Companies Act 1857 c. 49* Stock Companies Act 1857 c. 14* Stock Companies Act 1857 c. 80* Stock Companies Winding-up Amendment Act 1857 c. 78* in Siam Act 1857 c. 75* and Assessed Taxes (Scotland) Act 1857 c. 28* Tax Commissioners (Appointment) Act 1857 c. 46* Valuation (Scotland) Act 1857 c. 58* Societies Act 1857 c. 41* (Scotland) Act 1857 c. 71* Womens Reversionary Interests Act 1857 c. 57* Causes Act 1857 c. 85* Police Act 1857 c. 64* Ballots Suspension Act 1857 c. 21* Embodiment Act 1857 c. 82* ( Ireland ) Act 1857 c. 11* Pay Act 1857 c. 65* Money (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 8* Corporations Act 1857 c. 50* etc., East Indies Act 1857 c. 66* Brunswick Boundary Act 1857 c. 34* Zealand Companys Claims Act 1857 c. 52* Zealand Constitution Amendment Act 1857 c. 53* Zealand Loan Guarantee Act 1857 c. 51* Publications Act 1857 c. 83* University Act 1857 c. 25* Schoolmasters (Scotland) Act 1857 c. 59* Servitude Act 1857 c. 3* Improvement Act 1857 c. 67* (Scotland) Act 1857 c. 72* Harbour Waterworks Act 1857 c. 32* and Letters of Administration (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 79* Order Confirmation (Turnpikes) Act 1857 c. 9* Health Supplemental Act for Aldershot 1857 c. 22* Works (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 23* of Frauds Act 1857 c. 54* Schools (England) Act 1857 c. 55* of Leases ( Scotland ) Act 1857 c. 26* Peers (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 33* Catholic Charities Act 1857 c. 76* Nuisance (Scotland) Act 1857 c. 73* Dues Redemption Act 1857 c. 12* Jurisdiction Act 1857 c. 43* Act 1857 c. 4* Acts Continuance Act 1857 c. 24* Abolition (Ireland) Act 1857 c. 16* Sites Act 1857 c. 131858 (21 & 22 Vict.)* (Lady of Havelock) Act 1858 c. 2* Act 1858 c. 107* Enlistment Act 1858 c. 55* of England Act 1858 c. 1* and Deaths Registration Act 1858 c. 25* Trusts Substitution Act 1858 c. 71* Charities Act 1858 c. 30* Charities Act 1858 c. 31* Columbia Government Act 1858 c. 99* University Act 1858 c. 11* of Quarter Sessions (Ireland) Act 1858 c. 88* Amendment Act 1858 c. 27* Trains and Canal Carriers Act 1858 c. 75* Bridge Act 1858 c. 66* Hospital Act 1858 c. 18* Hospital Purchase Act 1858 c. 21* of Ireland Act 1858 c. 59* of Certain Marriages Act 1858 c. 46* of Executors (Scotland) Act 1858 c. 56* Diseases of Sheep Act 1858 c. 62* Commission Act 1858 c. 53* Act 1858 c. 94* of Designs Act 1858 c. 70* Submarine Mines Act 1858 c. 109* Practices Act 1858 c. 87* Court Districts (England) Act 1858 c. 74* Property Act 1858 c. 92* Rates (England) Act 1858 c. 33* of Probate Act 1858 c. 95* Charity Act 1858 c. 81* Act 1858 c. 12* Act 1858 c. 16* Parts of Counties (England) Act 1858 c. 68* on Bankers Act 1858 c. 79* Four Courts Act 1858 c. 84* County Palatine Act 1858 c. 45* India Loans Act 1858 c. 3* Jurisdiction Act 1858 c. 50* Leasing Act 1858 c. 57* of Members during Recess Act 1858 c. 110* Bills Act 1858 c. 13* Bonds Act 1858 c. 14* Act 1858 c. 15* Prisons Abolition Act 1858 c. 22* Societies Act 1858 c. 101* of India Act 1858 c. 106* Forest (Allotment of Commons) Act 1858 c. 37* Charity, Folkestone Act 1858 c. 29* Fisheries (Scotland) Act 1858 c. 69* Act 1858 c. 8* Act 1858 c. 61* Act 1858 c. 54* Courts Officers (Ireland) Act 1858 c. 52* Relief Act 1858 c. 49* Stock Banks Act 1858 c. 91* Stock Companies Act 1858 c. 60* Mortgage (Ireland) Act 1858 c. 105* Estates Court (Ireland) Act 1858 c. 72* of the Commissioners for the Exhibition of 1851 Act 1858 c. 36* of False Pretences Act 1858 c. 47* Declaration Act 1858 c. 93* Societies Act 1858 c. 19* Government Act 1858 c. 98* (Scotland) Act 1858 c. 89* Mutiny Act 1858 c. 7* Causes Act 1858 c. 108* Act 1858 c. 90* Management Amendment Act 1858 c. 104* Act 1858 c. 4* Act 1858 c. 85* Ballot Suspension Act 1858 c. 39* Embodiment Act 1858 c. 86* Pay Act 1858 c. 82* Franchise Act 1858 c. 43* Act 1858 c. 9* (Ireland) Act 1858 c. 41* General Post Office, Edinburgh , Act 1858 c. 40* of Allegiance, etc., and Relief of Jews Act 1858 c. 48* Witnesses Act 1858 c. 78* Preservation (Ireland) Act 1858 c. 28* Sessions Clerk ( Ireland ) Act 1858 c. 100* (Scotland) Act 1858 c. 65* and Albreda Convention Act 1858 c. 35* Bridge Tolls Act 1858 c. 23* (Ireland) Act 1858 c. 42* Qualification for Members of Parliament Act 1858 c. 26* Order Confirmation Turnpikes Act 1858 c. 80* Health Act 1858 c. 97* Health Supplemental Act 1858 c. 10* (Ireland) Act 1858 c. 34* of National Debt Act 1858 c. 38* Schools (Ireland) Act 1858 c. 103* to Secretary of State Act 1858 c. 67* Catholic Charities Act 1858 c. 51* Estates Act 1858 c. 77* Act 1858 c. 20* Act 1858 c. 24* and Wolsingham Rectories Act 1858 c. 58* Magistrates Act 1858 c. 73* Act 1858 c. 5* Act 1858 c. 6* Act 1858 c. 17* to Land ( Scotland ) Act 1858 c. 76* Acts Continuance Act 1858 c. 63* and College Estates Act 1858 c. 44* (Scotland) Act 1858 c. 83* (Ireland) Act 1858 c. 64* of Acts of Late Chief Justice of Bombay Act 1858 c. 32* Indian Incumbered Estates Act 1858 c. 96* of Utility, etc., Indemnity Act 1858 c. 102185922 Vict.* by Quakers, etc. Act 1859 c. 10* Act 1859 c. 23* Act 1859 c. 1* of Workmen Act 1859 c. 34* for Oaths, Bail in Error, etc. Act 1859 c. 16* and Probate Amendment Act 1859 c. 30* of Marriages Act 1859 c. 24* Prisons Abroad Act 1859 c. 25* Inquests, Bail Act 1859 c. 33* Courts Westminster and Southwark Act 1859 c. 8* Act 1859 c. 12* India Loan Act 1859 c. 11* by Commission Act 1859 c. 20* of Ecclesiastical Patronage Act 1859 c. 9* Bills Act 1859 c. 22* Act 1859 c. 3* Act 1859 c. 15* Government Supplemental Act 1859 c. 31* Courts Abolition (Ireland) Act 1859 c. 14* Mutiny Act 1859 c. 5* Act 1859 c. 21* Corporation Act 1859 c. 35* Act 1859 c. 4* Medical Supplemental Fund Society Act 1859 c. 28* Charities Act 1859 c. 18* of November 5, May 29, etc. Act 1859 c. 2* for Inventions Act 1859 c. 13* Law Charges Act 1859 c. 29* Offices Extension Act 1859 c. 19* Grounds Act 1859 c. 27* of Penalties Act 1859 c. 32* Banks (Ireland) Act 1859 c. 17* Act 1859 c. 26* Act 1859 c. 6* Act 1859 c. 722 & 23 Vict.* Turnpike Acts Continuance Act 1859 c. 51 (An Act to continue certain Turnpike Acts in Great Britain.)* and Barbuda Act 1859 c. 13 (An Act to enable Her Majesty to confirm an Act passed by the Legislature of Antigua, intituled An Act to extend the Operation of the Laws of Antigua to the Island of Barbuda.)* Act 1859 c. 55 (An Act to apply a Sum out of the Consolidated Fund and the Surplus of Ways and Means to the Service of the Year One thousand eight hundred and fifty-nine; and to appropriate the Supplies granted in this Session of Parliament.)* etc. (Ireland) Act 1859 c. 62 (An Act to amend the Irish Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act (1857).)* Survey (Ireland) Act 1859 c. 8 (An Act to amend the Act of the Twentieth and Twenty-first Years of Victoria, Chapter Forty-five, relating to the Survey of Boundaries in Ireland.)* Law Ascertainment Act 1859 c. 63 (An Act to afford Facilities for the more certain Ascertainment of the Law administered in one Part of Her Majestys Dominions when pleaded in the Courts of another Part thereof.)* University, etc. Act 1859 c. 34 (An Act to continue the Powers of the Commissioners under an Act of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Years of Her Majesty, concerning the University of Cambridge and the College of King Henry the Sixth at Eton.)* Superintendent in China Act 1859 c. 9 (An Act to provide for the Exercise of the Duties of Chief Superintendent in China in certain Cases.)* of the Council Act 1859 c. 1 (An Act to provide for the Authentication of certain Orders of the Privy Council in the Absence of the Clerk of the Council in Ordinary.)* Act 1859 c. 30 (An Act to extend the Enactments relating to the Copper Coin to Coin of mixed Metal.)* Affidavits Act 1859 c. 12 (An Act to repeal, as regards the Colony of Victoria) and to enable other Colonial Legislatures to repeal, certain Provisions of the Imperial Acts of the Fifty-fourth Year of George the Third, Chapter Fifteen, and of the Fifth and Sixth Years of William the Fourth, Chapter Sixty-two.)* of Marriages Act 1859 c. 64 (An Act to remove Doubts as to the Validity of certain Marriages of British Subjects at Lisbon.)* (Ireland) Act 1859 c. 22 (An Act to amend the Acts relating to the Constabulary Force in Ireland.)* Practices Act 1859 c. 48 (An Act to continue the Corrupt Practices Prevention Act, 1854.)* and Borough Police Act 1859 c. 32 (An Act to amend the Law concerning the Police in Counties and Boroughs in England and Wales.)* Cess. (Ireland) Act 1859 c. 23 (An Act to continue certain Acts relating to the Collection of County Cess in Ireland.)* Court Judges Act 1859 c. 57 (An Act limiting the Power of Imprisonment for Small Debts exercised by the County Court Judges.)* of Probate (Ireland) Act 1859 c. 31 (An Act to amend the Law relating to Probates and Letters of Administration in Ireland.)* Act 1859 c. 37 (An Act for the Amendment of the Laws relating to the Customs.)* Police Act 1859 c. 52 (An Act to amend the Laws relating to the Police District of Dublin Metropolis.)* India Loan (No. 2) Act 1859 c. 39 (An Act to enable the Secretary of State in Council of India to raise Money in the United Kingdom for the Service of the Government of India.)* Jurisdiction Act 1859 c. 45 (An Act to continue certain temporary Provisions concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England.)* and Capitular Estates Act 1859 c. 46 (An Act to continue and amend the Act concerning the Management of Episcopal and Capitular Estates in England.)* Troops in India Act 1859 c. 27 (An Act to repeal the Thirty-first Section of the Act of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Years of Victoria, Chapter Ninety-five, and to alter the Limit of the Number of European Troops to be maintained for local Service in India.)* Harbour Act 1859 c. 28 (An Act to amend the Galway Harbour and Port Act (1853).)* of India Act 1859 c. 41 (An Act to amend the Act for the better Government of India.)* Court of Admiralty Act 1859 c. 6 (An Act to enable Serjeants, Barristers-at-Law, Attorneys, and Solicitors to practise in the High Court of Admiralty.)* Harbour Railway Act 1859 c. 60 (An Act to extend the Powers of an Act passed in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Years of Her Majesty, Chapter One hundred and eleven, relating to the laying down of Railways at Holyhead Harbour.)* of Commons Act 1859 c. 5 (An Act to remove Doubts as to the Qualification of Persons holding Diplomatic Pensions to sit in Parliament.)* Act 1859 c. 43 (An Act to amend and extend the Provisions of the Acts for the Inclosure, Exchange, and Improvement of Land.)* Act 1859 c. 47 (An Act to authorize the Inclosure of certain Lands in pursuance of a Special Report of the Inclosure Commissioners of England and Wales.)* Tax Act 1859 c. 18 (An Act for granting to Her Majesty additional Rates of Income Tax; and to reduce the Period of Credit allowed for Payment of the Excise Duty on Malt.)* Trials (Scotland) Act 1859 c. 7 (An Act to amend an Act of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Years of Her Majesty, for allowing Verdicts on Trials by Jury in Civil Causes in Scotland to be received, although the Jury may not be unanimous.)* of Property Amendment Act 1859 c. 35 (An Act to further amend the Law of Property, and to relieve Trustees.)* Council of Canada Act 1859 c. 10 (An Act to empower the Legislature of Canada to make Laws regulating the Appointment of a Speaker of the Legislative Council.)* etc., Manufacturers (Ireland) Act 1859 c. 25 (An Act to continue certain Acts relating to Linen, Hempen, and other Manufactures in Ireland.)* Government Supplemental (No. 2) Act 1859 c. 11 (An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders under the Local Government Act (1858).)* Causes Act 1859 c. 61 (An Act to make further Provision concerning the Court for Divorce and Matrimonial Causes.)* Sessions Act 1859 c. 4 (An Act to amend the Act for the better Administration of Criminal Justice in Middlesex.)* Savings Bank Act 1859 c. 20 (An Act to amend and consolidate the Laws relating to Military Savings Banks.)* Act 1859 c. 38 (An Act further to amend the Laws relating to the Militia.)* Ballots Suspension Act 1859 c. 15 (An Act to suspend the making of Lists and the Ballots for the Militia of the United Kingdom.)* Pay Act 1859 c. 54 (An Act to defray the Charge of the Pay, Clothing, and contingent and other Expenses of the Disembodied Militia in Great Britain and Ireland; to grant Allowances in certain Cases to Subaltern Officers, Adjutants, Paymasters, Quartermasters, Surgeons, Assistant Surgeons, and Surgeons Mates of the Militia; and to authorize the Employment of the Noncommissioned Officers.)* Territories of America Act 1859 c. 26 (An Act to make further Provision for the Regulation of the Trade with the Indians, and for the Administration of Justice in the North-western Territories of America.)* Act 1859 c. 14 (An Act to amend an Act of the Thirty-ninth and Fortieth Years of King George the Third, for better regulating the Business of Pawnbrokers.)* Sessional Divisions Act 1859 c. 65 (An Act for amending the Acts for the better Regulation of Divisions in the several Counties of England and Wales.)* Law (Payment of Debts) Act 1859 c. 49 (An Act to provide for the Payment of Debts incurred by Boards of Guardians in Unions and Parishes and Boards of Management in School Districts.)* Rates Act 1859 c. 44 (An Act to continue the Act for the Exemption of Stock in Trade from Rating.)* and Other Courts and Registries Site Act 1859 c. 16 (An Act to enable the Commissioners of Her Majestys Works to acquire a Site for the Purposes of Her Majestys Court of Probate., and other Courts and Offices.)* Duty Act 1859 c. 36 (An Act to alter the Stamp Duties payable upon Probates of Wills and Letters of Administration, to repeal the Stamp Duties on Licences to exercise the Faculty of Physic, and to amend the Laws relating to Hawkers and Pedlars.)* Order Confirmation Turnpikes Act 1859 c. 33 (An Act to confirm certain Provisional Orders made under an Act of the Fifteenth Year of Her present Majesty, to facilitate Arrangements for the Belief of Turnpike Trusts.)* Health Act 1859 c. 3 (An Act to amend and make perpetual  The Public Health Act, 1858.)* Remembrancer Act 1859 c. 21 (An Act to regulate the Office of Queens Remembrancer, and to amend the Practice and Procedure on the Revenue Side of the Court of Exchequer.)* Companies Arbitration Act 1859 c. 59 (An Act to enable Railway Companies to settle their Differences with other Companies by Arbitration.)* of Nore Tolls Act 1859 c. 29 (An Act to repeal a certain Toll levied upon Fishing Vessels passing the Nore.)* Force Act 1859 c. 42 (An Act to provide for the Establishment of a Reserve Force of Men who have been in Her Majestys Service.)* Catholic Charities Act 1859 c. 50 (An Act further to continue the Exemption of certain Charities from the Operation of the Charitable Trusts Acts.)* Naval Reserve (Volunteer) Act 1859 c. 40 (An Act for the Establishment of a Reserve Volunteer Force of Seamen, and for the Government of the same.)* of Gas Act 1859 c. 66 (An Act for regulating Measures used in Sales of Gas.)* Bank (Charitable Societies) Act 1859 c. 53 (An Act to enable Charitable and Provident Societies and Penny Savings Banks to invest all their Proceeds in Savings Banks.)* Act 1859 c. 2 (An Act to apply the Sum of Seven Millions out of the Consolidated Fund to the Service of the Year One thousand eight hundred and fifty-nine.)* (Scotland) Act 1859 c. 24 (An Act to remove Doubts as to Admission to the Office of Principal in the Universities of Scotland.)* of Oxford and Cambridge Act 1859 c. 19 (An Act to repeal Part of an Act passed in the Thirteenth Year of Elizabeth, Chapter Twenty-nine, concerning the several Incorporations of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and the Confirmation of the Charters, Liberties, and Privileges granted to either of them.)* Indictments Act 1859 c. 17 (An Act to prevent Vexatious Indictments for certain Misdemeanors.)* and Measures Act 1859 c. 56 (An Act to amend the Act of the Fifth and Sixth Years of King William the Fourth, Chapter Sixty-three, relating to Weights and Measures.)* Bridge Act 1859 c. 58 (An Act to empower the Commissioners of Her Majestys Works and Public Buildings to acquire additional Space for the Western Approach to Westminster New Bridge.)
3912162
Stafurt
Stafurt (Stassfurt) () is a town in the Salzlandkreis district, in Saxony-Anhalt, Germany. It is situated on both sides of the river Bode, approximately  northeast of Aschersleben, and  south of Magdeburg. Pop. (2005) 23,538.It was one of the chief seats of the German salt-producing industry. It is still surrounded in part by the ruins of its ancient walls, but, with the exception of the parish church of St. John (15th century), there are no buildings worthy of special notice.Although saline springs are mentioned here as early as the 13th century, the first attempt to bore for salt was not made until 1839, while the systematic exploitation of the salt-beds, to which the town is indebted for its prosperity, dates only from 1856. The shafts reached deposits of salt at a depth of 850 ft. (190 m); but the finer and purer layers lie more than 100 ft. (31 m) below the surface. The rock-salt is excavated by blasting. Besides the rock-salt, the deposits of Stassfurt yield a considerable quantity of deliquescent salts and other saline products, which have encouraged the foundation of numerous chemical factories in the town and in the neighboring village of Leopoldshall (currently part of Stafurt). The rock-salt works are mainly government property, while the chemical factories are in private hands.Stassfurt Potash depositThe Stassfurt Potash deposit, a part of the same evaporite sequence that hosts the salt mines, is notable historically as the site of the earliest large-scale mining of potash for fertilizer, beginning in 1861.(Vaclav Smil, 2006, Transforming the Twentieth Century: Technical Innovations and Their Consequences, http://books.google.com/books?idtl23A0mCPLUC&pgPA147&lpgPA147&dq%22Stassfurt+Potash+deposit%22&sourcebl&otspMXeBHqViI&sigN5Dfnzmv7Artxp3MtgYYzIuM_XE&hlen&eiz9foS7nvH5PWtgPOm4nmBw&saX&oibook_result&ctresult&resnum9&ved0CDMQ6AEwCA#vonepage&q%22Stassfurt%20Potash%20deposit%22&ftrue, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195168754)File:Halite-223876.jpg|Halite crystal from Stassfurt Potash deposit. The beautiful azure-blue color banding is sought after by collectors.Notable residents* Wilhelm von Willisen (17901879), Prussian general* Steinkopf (18791949), German chemistReferencesbe-x-old:da:Stafurtde:Stafurteo:Stafurtfa:fr:Stafurtit:Stafurtnl:Stafurtpl:Stafurtpt:Stafurtro:Stafurtru:sr:vi:Stafurtvo:Stafurtwar:Stafurt
3920191
Online_ethnography
Online ethnography refers to a number of related research methods that adapt ethnography to the study of the communities and cultures created through computer-mediated social interaction. Prominent among these ethnographic approaches are online ethnography (Correll, Shelley (1995), The Ethnography of an Electronic Bar: the Lesbian Caf, Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 24, 3, October, 270-298.),virtual ethnography (), and netnography. As modifications of the term ethnography, online ethnography and virtual ethnography (as well as many other methodological neologisms) designate online fieldwork that follows from the conception of ethnography as an adaptable method. These methods tend to leave most of the specifics of the adaptation to the individual researcher. Netnography suggests the use of specific procedures and standards, and argues for consideration of particular consensually-agreed upon techniques, justifying the use of a new name rather than a modification of the term ethnography (Kozinets, Robert V. (2002), The Field Behind the Screen: Using Netnography for Marketing Research in Online Communities, of Marketing Research, 39 (February), 61-72.) Introduction All ethnographies of online cultures and communities extend the traditional notions of field and ethnographic study, as well as ethnographic cultural analysis and representation, from the observation of co-located, face-to-face interactions to technologically mediated interactions in online networks and communities, and the culture (or cyberculture) shared between and among them. In doing so, these techniques are founded in the sense that traditional notions of a field site as a localized space are outdated. They suggest that ethnographic fieldwork can be meaningfully applied to computer-mediated interactions, an assertion that some have contested (Clifford, J. (1997). Spatial Practices: Fieldwork, Travel, and the Discipline of Anthropology. In A. Gupta & J. Ferguson (Eds.) Anthropological Locations: Boundaries and Grounds of a Field Science. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 185-222.), but which is increasingly becoming accepted (Bishop, J. (2008). Increasing capital revenue in social networking communities: Building social and economic relationships through avatars and characters. In C. Romm-Livermore, & K. Setzekorn (Eds.), Social networking communities and eDating services: Concepts and implications. New York: IGI Global. Available online)(Garcia, Angela Cora, Alecea I. Standlee, Jennifer Bechkoff, and Yan Cui (2009), Ethnographic Approaches to the Internet and Computer-Mediated Communication, Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 38 (1), February, 52-84.)Almost since their inception, ethnographies of online cultures and communities have been conducted that are purely observational, in which the researcher is a specialized type of lurker (Kozinets, Robert V. (2006a), Netnography 2.0, in Handbook of Qualitative Research Methods in Marketing, ed. Russell W. Belk, Cheltenham, UN and Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing, 129-142.). However, other researchers have emphasized a more participative approach, in which the researcher fully participates as a member of the online community. This latter approach is closer to traditional ethnographic standards of observation, prolonged engagement, and deep immersion. In many of its renderings, netnography, online ethnography, or virtual ethnography should maintain the values of traditional ethnography through providing a Geertzian sense of thick description (1973 ( )) through the immersion of the researcher in the life of the online culture or community (Hine 2000 (), Markham 1998 ()). This focus on participation and immersion makes these approaches quite distinct from usage mining or network analysis, although ethnographers may use similar techniques to identify or map networks.The key question for the researcher is how can ethnography be pursued in computer-mediated social settings? Researchers have attempted to create computer-mediated counterparts for many of the basic ethnographic concepts but whether they can appropriately be applied to technologically mediated interaction is still open (Howard, 2003). For example, if a researcher simply reads some emails or participates in chat rooms, does this represent an ethnography? The key is participation. Can the researcher still be said to have immersed themselves in the life of the community and to have engaged in the culture as a full-fledged member? There is debate in the online research community to what extent participation is required, with completely observational articles published as a type of ethnography of online cultures.The Range of MethodologiesThere are a range of different ways that ethnographers have attempted to study the internet. The methodological approach of virtual ethnography has been broadened and reformulated through a variety of other terms. Most of these terms and the techniques they represent seek to maintain their own dialogue with the established tradition of ethnography. Each formulates its relation to the established anthropological tradition in different (and sometimes inconsistent) ways. There are those who consider that ethnographies conducted online involves a distinctive methodological approach. There are also those who consider that researching the Internet ethnographically forces us to reflect on fundamental assumptions and concepts of ethnography, but that it doesnt mean a distinctive form of ethnography.(Domnguez, Daniel, Anne Beaulieu, Adolfo Estalella, Edgar Gmez, Bernt Schnettlerand Rosie Read. (2007). Virtual Ethnography. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Qualitative Social Research, 8(3).)NetnographyThe term netnography has gained currency within the field of consumer research to refer to ethnographic research conducted on the Internet. It is a qualitative, interpretive research methodology that adapts the traditional, in-person ethnographic research techniques of anthropology to the study of the online cultures and communities formed through computer-mediated communications (CMC).At least four aspects of online, computer-mediated, or virtual, interaction and community formation are distinct from their in-person, real life (RL), or face-to-face (F2F) counterparts. First is the textual, nonphysical, and social-cue-impoverished context of the online environment. Second is an unprecedented new level of access to the heretofore unobservable behaviors of particular interacting peoples. Third, while traditional interactions are ephemeral as they occur, online social interactions are often automatically saved and archived, creating permanent records. Finally, the social nature of the new medium is unclear as to whether it is a private or public space, or some unique hybrid. Ethnography adapts common participant-observation ethnographic proceduressuch as making cultural entre, data collection, analyzing data, and conducting ethical researchto these computer-mediated contingencies and provides sets of specific guidelines (see Kozinets 2002 for a detailed development of the process; see also Kozinets 2006).Netnographic MethodologyThere are a range of methodological prescriptions involved in conducts a netnography. This entry will provide an overview of them, but interested researchers should consult other methodological texts for details (e.g., Kozinets 1998, 2002, 2006a).Gaining Entry to Online Communities and CulturesGiven the wide range of choices of online communal forms, including blogs, web-rings, chat, SMS, gamespaces, bulletin boards, and mailing lists, researchers should spend the time to match their research questions and interests to appropriate online forum, using the novel resources of online search engines such as Yahoo! and Google groups, before initiating entre. Before initiating contact as a participant, or beginning formal data collection, the distinctive characteristics of the online communities should be familiar to the netnographer. In netnographic entree, following ethical standards such as full and accurate disclosure of the presence of the researcher is critical (Kozinets 2002).Data CollectionIn a netnography, data takes two forms: data that the researcher directly copies from the computer-mediated communications of online community members, and data that the researcher inscribes. Reflective fieldnotes, in which ethnographers record their observations, are a time-tested and recommended method in netnography. Although some netnographies have been conducted using only observation and download, without the researcher writing a single fieldnote, this non-participant approach draws into question the ethnographic orientation of the investigation.As with theory, data collection should continue as long as new insights are being generated. For purposes of precision, some netnographers closely track the amount of text collected and read, and the number of distinct participants. CAQDAS software solutions can expedite coding, content analysis, data linking, data display, and theory-building functions. New forms of qualitative data analysis are constantly being developed by a variety of firms (such as MotiveQuest and Neilsen BuzzMetrics), although the results of these firms are more like content analyses of than ethnographic representations (Kozinets 2006). However, some scholars dispute netnographys distance from content analysis, preferring to assert that it is also a content analytic technique (Langer and Beckman 2005).Data AnalysisDistinct from data mining and content analysis, netnography as a method emphasizes the cultural contextualizing of online data. This often proves to be challenging in the social-cues-impoverished online context. Because netnography is based primarily upon the observation of textual discourse, ensuring trustworthy interpretations requires a different approach than the balancing of discourse and observed behavior that occurs during in-person ethnography. Although the online landscape mediates social representation and renders problematic the issue of informant identity, netnography seems perfectly amenable to treating behavior or the social act as the ultimate unit of analysis, rather than the individual person.Research EthicsResearch ethics may be one of the most important differences between traditional ethnography and netnography. Ethical concerns over netnography turn on early concerns about whether online forums are to be considered a private or a public site, and about what constitutes informed consent in cyberspace (see Paccagnella 1997). In a major departure from traditional methods, netnography uses cultural information that is not given specifically, and in confidence, to the researcher. The consumers who originally created the data do not necessarily intend or welcome its use in research representations. Netnography therefore offers specific guidelines regarding when to cite online posters and authors, how to cite them, what to consider in an ethical netnographic representation, when to ask permission, and when permission is not necessary (Kozinets 2002).Advantages and Limitations of NetnographyCompared to surveys, experiments, focus groups, and personal interviews, netnography can be less obtrusive. It is conducted using observations in a context that is not fabricated by the researcher. Netnography also is less costly and timelier than focus groups and personal interviews.The limitations of netnography draw from its more narrow focus on online communities, its inability to offer the full and rich detail of lived human experience, the need for researcher interpretive skill, and the lack of informant identifiers present in the online context that leads to difficulty generalizing results to groups outside the online community sample. However, these limitations can be ameliorated somewhat by careful use of convergent data collection methods that bridge offline and online research in a systematic manner (Kozinets 1998, 2002). Researchers wishing to generalize the findings of a netnography of a particular online group to other groups must apply careful evaluations of similarity and consider using multiple methods for research triangulation. Netnography is still a relatively new method, and awaits further development and refinement at the hands of a new generation of Internet-savvy ethnographic researchers. However, several researchers are developing the techniques in social networking sites, virtual worlds, mobile communities, and other novel computer-mediated social domains.Advantages and Limitations of Ethnographic Research in Online Cultures and CommunitiesThe limitations of ethnographies of online cultures draw from its more narrow focus on online communities, its inability to offer the full and rich detail of lived human experience, the need for researcher interpretive skill, and the lack of informant identifiers present in the online context that leads to difficulty generalizing results to groups outside the online community sample. Researchers wishing to generalize the findings of a netnography of a particular online group to other groups must apply careful evaluations of similarity and consider using other methods for research triangulation (Clark. L, Ting. I.-H, Kimble. C, Wright. P and Kudenko, D. Combining Ethnographic and Clickstream Data to Identify User Web Browsing Strategies. Information Research, 11(2), 2006.). Related Wikipedia Entries * Ethnography* Community* of cyberspace* research community* of Practice* networks* Community of Practice* NetnographyReferences Further reading * Jupp, Victor. (2006b), Netnography, The Sage Dictionary of Social Research, ed. Victor Jupp, London: Sage, 193-195.* __________. (1999), E-Tribalized Marketing? The Strategic Implications of Virtual Communities of Consumption, Management Journal, 17 (3), 252-264.* __________. (1997) I Want To Believe: A Netnography of The X-Philes Subculture of Consumption, Advances in Consumer Research, Volume 24, ed., Merrie Brucks and Deborah J. MacInnis, Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 470-475.* Alzola Romero, Aarn /WHOIS? Identity: Collectivity and the Self in IRC, Psychnology Journal, Vol. 1 No. 2, 87-130.* Clark, Lillian I-Hsien Ting, Chris Kimble, Peter Wright and Daniel Kudenko. Combining ethnographic and clickstream data to identify user Web browsing strategies, Information Research, Vol. 11 No. 2, January 2006* Chrichton, Susan and Shelly Kinash. Virtual Ethnography: Interactive Interviewing Online as Method, Journal of Learning and Technology, Volume 29(2) Spring, 2003.* * __________. 1998. Virtual Ethnography, Research for Information and Social Scientists (IRISS) conference.* Giesler, Markus. 2008. Conflict and Compromise: Drama in Marketplace Evolution, of Consumer Research. 34 (April): electronically published August 27, 2007.* __________. 2006. Consumer Gift Systems: Netnographic Insights from Napster. Journal of Consumer Research. 33 (September): 283-90.* Greive, Gregory. (1995) Imagining a Virtual Religious Community: Neo-pagans on The Internet, Anthropology Exchange 7 (Winter): 98-132.*** Puri, Anjali. The Web of Insights - The Art and Practice of Webnography, Journal of Market Research. Volume 49, issue 3, 2007.* Tomlinson, Mark. The Academic Robotics Community in the UK: Web based data construction and analysis of a distributed community of practice (Working Paper). Danish Research Unit for Industrial Dynamics.* Torres, L., Gonzalez, H., Ojeda, J., & Monguet, J. (2010). PLEs from virtual ethnography of Web 2.0. In The PLE Conference 2010. Barcelona. http://pleconference.citilab.eu.* Verhaeghe A., Prof. Dr. Schillewaert N., Van den Berge E., 2009, Getting answers without asking questions, ESOMAR ONLINE RESEARCH 09External links* Virtual Ethnographyde:Netnographieetnografijavirtualzh:
3923666
Hellenic_State_Railways
File:Thessaloniki train station.jpg|thumb|right|Railway Station, Thessaloniki (1962)Hellenic State Railways or SEK (, Sidirodromi Ellinikou Kratous; ...) was a Greek public sector entity (legal person of public law, ) which was established in 1920 and operated most Greek railway lines until 1970.HistoryThe Hellenic State Railways took over the standard gauge railway line from Piraeus to Papapouli at the pre-1912 borders, the extension from Papapouli to Platy and most of the former Ottoman railway lines that were within the Greek borders after 1919. These lines were:* Piraeus, Demerli & Frontiers Railway (), also known as Larisaikos* Part of the former Thessaloniki & Monastir Railway ( or SM) * Part of de fer Orientaux or CO, between Thessaloniki and Idomeni. The line from Alexandroupolis to Ormenio was transferred to the Railway Company of Evros () which was absorbed by SEK much later, in 1954* The section of Thessaloniki-Constantinople Railway ( or JSC) between Thessaloniki and Alexandroupolis.* The 66 km long Sarakli-Stavros line, a former military line (600 mm) constructed during War I.* The 50 km long Skydra local railway, a former military line (600 mm) constructed during War I and initially operated until 1936 by a company called Local Railways of Macedonia ().After World War II the Hellenic State Railways absorbed most other Greek railways, including:* Athens and Peloponnese Railways (1962), which had already absorbed other minor metre gauge railways.* Railways (1955), including Pelion railway. * The French-Hellenic Railway Company (Chemin de fer Franco-Hellenique) of Evros (1954). Only Ellinikoi Ilektrikoi Sidirodromoi (E.I.S., later ISAP), operator of Piraeus-Kifissia railway and Piraeus-Perama light railway, and the private mining and industrial lines remained independent.The Hellenic State Railways existed until December 31, 1970. On the next day all railways in Greece with the exception of private industrial lines and E.I.S. were transferred to Hellenic Railways Organisation S.A., a state-owned corporation.Network and other infrastructureDuring this period very little expansion of the existing network took place, the most notable being:* The Amyntaio-Kozani branch (1955).* The 15 km long line from Strymon to Kulata (1966), connecting the Greek and Bulgarian railway networks. * Another 25 km long branch line from Zichni (Mirini) to Amphipolis (1931), which was later abandoned and the track was lifted in 1970.* Conversion of the line between Athens and Inoi to double track.A contract was signed in 1928 for a new line connecting Kalampaka to Kozani, but the project was abandoned in 1932 due to lack of funds.The Greek railway system (both infrastructure and rolling stock) suffered serious damages during World War II (especially in 1943-1944) and did not become fully operational until 1950. However the viaduct of Achladokampos in Peloponnese, destroyed in 1944, was rebuilt only in 1974.In 1960 the line from Larissa to Volos, of the former Railways, was converted to standard gauge and was connected in Larissa with the line from Athens to Thessaloniki.New station buildings were constructed in Thessaloniki (known as Thessaloniki New Passenger Station or ) (1952), Larissa (1962), Lianokladi (1950), Sindos, Aiginio, Platamon, Florina, Edessa, Agras, Arnissa, Polykastron, Ptolemais and Kozani.Rolling stockUntil 1962 the Hellenic State Railways used a variety of steam locomotives from various sources. Some of them belonged to the pre-1920 networks, a number were acquired as part of foreign aid programs after the war and a small number was procured. Conversion to diesel traction began in the early 1960s. The first locomotives were delivered in 1962 and included 30 Krupp Y60 shunters (Class A-101), 10 ALCo DL532B (Class A-201) and 10 ALCo DL500C (Class A-301). They were followed by classes A-221, A-321, A-351, A-401 and A-411 for the  (gauge) network and classes A-9101, A-9201 and A-9401 for the  (gauge) networks. multiple units were first introduced in 1936 and became more common in the 1950s and 1960s. Steam locomotives were slowly phased out but were still in limited use in December 1970.Steam locomotivesThe following table shows steam locomotives acquired by the Hellenic State Railways between 1920 and 1969. They also continued to use an assortment of older types of locomotives inherited from the previous Greek and Ottoman railway companies.()()Diesel locomotives (standard gauge)Diesel locomotives (metre gauge)Diesel multiple unitsThe Hellenic State Railways bought their first DMUs in 1936 and acquired larger numbers in the 1950s. Additional gauge multiple units were ihnerited from networks absorbed in SEK.See also* of Greece* Railways OrganisationReferences and notesFurther reading*  It is the only extensive and authoritative source for the history of Greek railways. *  Contains brief history, simple line maps ans extensive list of rolling stock until 1997.* * * * * 
3928982
British_Rail_Class_D2/12
NCB (3 scrapped, 1 preserved)British Rail Class D2/12 was a locomotive commissioned by Rail in England. It was a diesel powered locomotive in the pre-TOPS period built by Clarke with a Gardner engine.  The mechanical transmission, using a scoop control coupling and four-speed Power-flow SSS (synchro-self-shifting) gearbox (Durham Mining Museum - Colliery Engineering), was a Hudswell Clarke speciality.The D2/12 was mechanically similar to the earlier Rail Class D2/7 but was of more modern appearance.  The engine casing was lower, giving much better all-round visibility.After British RailD2519 was employed at NCB Main, Doncaster, Yorkshire as a shunter. It was located there until at least 1984. D2511 is preserved at the and Worth Valley Railway (Marshall, A. (2007) Preserved Heritage Traction, GM Publications, Leeds, UK, ISBN 9780955558108).See alsoof British Rail classesReferencesSources* Ian Allan ABC of British Railways Locomotives, 1966 edition, page 81* Rail Class D2/12
3935725
Wharton,_West_Virginia
Wharton is an unincorporated community on the Pond Fork River in Boone County in the state of Virginia. Wharton lies along Virginia Route 85.  Wharton was named for Joseph Wharton, a large landowner from Philadelphia.Mining accidentOn February 1, 2006, a miner was killed at Long Branch Energys #18 mine in Wharton when a wall support popped loose. This fatality along with another one in a separate incident in Uneeda, also in Boone County, caused West Virginia Governor Manchin to call for a stand-down on mine safety at West Virginias mines. (West Virginia)
3944652
Vnukovo_Airlines_Flight_2801
survivors         0Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2801 was an international charter flight that, on 29 August 1996 at 10:22:23 European Summer Time, crashed in Operafjellet, Svalbard, Norway. All 141 people aboard the Tupolev Tu-154M were killed during the approach to Airport, Longyear, making it the deadliest aviation accident ever in Norway. The accident was the result of a series of small navigational errors causing the aircraft to be  from the approach centerline at the time of impact. The accident was investigated by the Investigation Board Norway with assistance from the Aviation Committee and became known as the Operafjell Accident ().The Airlines aircraft, registration number RA-85621, was chartered by Arktikugol, a Russian state owned coal mining company, to fly Russian and Ukrainian workers from International Airport in Moscow, Russia to Svalbard Airport, Longyear in Longyearbyen, Norway. The passengers all belonged to the Russian communities of Barentsburg and Pyramiden. The fatalities included 11 crew members and 130 passengers, of which 3 were children. The accident was a contributing cause for Arktikugols closure of Pyramiden two years later. After the accident, there were a series of lawsuits to determine the compensations to the victims families.HistoryFlightFlight 2801 was a chartered flight flown by Vnukovo Airlines on behalf of Arktikugol, which operated mines at the two towns of Barentsburg and Pyramiden in Svalbard.() The aircraft was a Tupolev Tu-154M, with registration RA-85621, serial number 86A 742 and date of manufacture 14 January 1987.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 15) The flight consisted of a crew of eleven, including a cockpit crew of four (two aircraft pilots, one engineer and one navigator), a crew of five and two technicians. The in command (PiC) had previously landed at Svalbard Airport; the first officer had not and was the piloting pilot.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 78)On board were 130 passengers, of which 3 were children, consisting of Arktikugol employees and their families.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 7) Waiting at the airport for the return flight were 120 other employees and their families.() The aircraft left Vnukovo Airport at 04:44 Universal Time (UTC) or 08:44 Summer Time. Estimated flight time was 3 hours and 30 minutes, and alternative airports were Airport and Severomorsk-3, both in Oblast, Russia.( The flight proceeded normally until descent, following the routing W 29 from Moscow to Padun (west of Murmansk), before crossing to Bod Flight Information Region over the Sea cruising at FL 350 at an average airspeed of . It then proceeded over Bjrnya beacon (NDB), Isfjord NDB and Advent NDB.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 8)The weather at the accident area was dominated by a pressure trough, giving rain showers and wind from  at 240270. Visibility exceeded . Between 08:00 and 09:00, a weak trough passed, reducing visibility to  and a cloud base at .(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 18)Svalbard Airport, Longyear, is the main airport serving the Svalbard archipelago. It is located on the south shore of Isfjord, with high terrain to the south, southeast and east. It has a single, 10/28 runway (roughly eastwest) which is  long. The airport has an elevation of  above sea level (MSL), and has an aerodrome flight information service (AFIS), which is subordinate Air Traffic Control Center (Bod ATCC). The airport is regarded as uncontrolled and does not provide approach service.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 24) On that day, all aircraft had used Runway 28, due to favorable wind conditions, climb-up conditions and short distance from the terminal.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 25)AccidentMirny Air Enterprise Tupolev Tu-154M.jpg|thumb|left|A Tupolev Tu-154M, similar to the aircraft involved in the accidentAt 07:55 UTC (09:55 local Central European Summer Time, CEST), the crew requested clearance to start descent. Because of lack of communication with Bod ATCC, this was not obtained. At 07:56, information from Longyear AFIS was given that there was no conflicting traffic, allowing a descent to  MSL. The crew tried to request use of Runway 10, but this was, due to language problems, not understood as such by AFIS. Instead, Longyear communicated the actual weather and informed that Runway 28 was in use. An additional request for use of Runway 10 was again not understood, because of the misunderstanding of the term runway in use. Because of this, the crew decided to instead use Runway 28.(The crew used Jeppesen charts dated 21 January 1994. According to procedures, both situation indicators (HSI) were set to 283, but the magnetic localizer course of 300 was not set. A positioning system (GPS) was used as a back-up. No requests were made for VHF direction finding.( From  MSL until impact, the flight was carried out in meteorological conditions (IMC) and the flight controlled by stabilization mode, with lateral navigation controlled by the navigator.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 9)At 08:10 UTC, the aircraft reached  MSL, which is the minimum altitude to Advent and the initial approach altitude. At 08:15:32 UTC, it reached Advent and entered a base turn, reaching a magnetic heading of 160 at 08:16:28 UTC. While the crew had adjusted for the wind drift, they did not attempt to intercept the magnetic course 155 outbound from Advent. During this turn, there was a malfunction in the electric trimming mechanism, which caused the piloting pilot to deactivate the flight control systems servogear in the pitch channel at 08:15:58. This was again activated at 08:16:42 UTC.(At 08:17:08 UTC, the crew started the turn to bring the aircraft to 300 magnetic inbound, however, the lateral deviation from the outbound magnetic course was 155, or  to the left. At 08:17:57 UTC, the navigator said Ah, abeam eight miles 2801 inbound, to which AFIS replied two seconds later Correct. This was the last radio communication between the crew and Longyear. At 08:18:30 UTC, the piloting pilot turned off the autopilot pitch channel.( For the rest of the flight, the plane continued with autopilot only in roll.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 10)Following the aircraft passing through the localizer centerline and having rolled out on 290, there was a discussion among the crew if the turn had been made at the right time. The initial comment about this was made by the first officer at 08:19:06 UTC. This resulted in a roll out of the turn to final approach and corrective turn to magnetic heading 306. At this time, the aircraft was  from the airport and  right of the centerline at  MSL with an airspeed of . Instead of intercepting the centerline, the crew continued to track on the right side, nearly paralleling the localizer course.(At 08:20:17 UTC, the pilot in command ordered the aircraft turned to 291, which adjusted for drift resulted in a course close to 300. At this time, the aircraft had a lateral deviation from the approach centerline of . The aircraft started descending at 08:20:24 UTC. A corrective turn was made at 08:21:13 UTC and completed 11 seconds later at magnetic heading 300. At the time, the aircraft was descending . The aircraft started turning left at 08:22:05 UTC, and immediately entered an area of turbulence created by the surrounding mountains.(During initial approach, the altimeter warning had been activated several times, which indicated less than  from the aircraft to the terrain. During final approach, the proximity warning system was activated nine seconds before impact, which lasted until impact. Six seconds before impact, the radio altimeter warning was activated. At 08:22:23 UTC (10:22:23 local CEST) the aircraft collided with the top of Operafjellet at  elevation, located  from Svalbard Airport and  right of the approach centerline. The aircraft was destroyed and all occupants perished instantly.( It is the single deadliest plane crash to have occurred on Norwegian soil.()RecoveryFile:Operafjellet-Seen-From-Plataafjellet.jpg|thumb|Adventfjorden with Operafjellet, the location of the accident, in the backgroundThe Rescue Coordination Centre of Northern Norway received a message about the crash at 10:30 CEST (8:30 UTC) and the and rescue service was immediately deployed. This included seven Norwegian aircraft that were in the area. The area had bad weather with a low cloud height, resulting in difficult searching conditions. The aircraft was found at 12:06 CEST at Operafjellet,  east of Svalbard Airport. Most of the aircraft was located on the mountains plateau, although some debris had slid down a vertical cliff and was scattered along the valley and partially covered by an avalanche. Rescue workers and medics from Hospital arrived at 12:36, and quickly established that there were no survivors.(The responsibility of the recovery was transferred to the of Svalbard on 30 August, since there were no survivors. In addition, police personnel from the mainland were transferred to Svalbard to work with the investigation and recovery. The work was supplemented by local volunteers. Because of the bad weather, which included fog and snow, it was often impossible to transport workers to the plateau, and work therefore started in the valley.(Governor Olsen traveled to Barentsburg on 30 August to inform the communities about the accident, and distributed ample written information in Russian about the then-known details about the crash. Later in the day, a Russian aircraft arrived with Deputy Minister Aleksandr Petrovich of the of Emergency Situations along with a team of 11 rescue workers, and representatives from the Aviation Committee (IAC), the of Ukraine in Moscow, the Air Transport Agency and Vnukovo Airlines. In a meeting that evening, the Governor accepted Russia assistance, while it was confirmed by international agreement that the investigation would be led by the authorities in the country where the accident occurred, Norway. On 31 August, Minister of Justice Faremo visited the Russian settlements as a representative from the of Norway.(The accident had a large impact on the community, with only 1,600 people living in the two Russian settlements. The population in the communities do not speak Norwegian, and do not have a road connection to Longyearbyen. This made it difficult for the Governor to give accurate and detailed information. Issues were further complicated by erroneous reports in Russian media that there were five survivors. The Governors cabin in Barentsburg was manned during the aftermath, and bulletins were distributed with updated information in Russian.( The accident was one of the triggers causing Aktikugol to abandon Pyramiden in 1998.()InvestigationAgreements between Norwegian and Russian authorities were made on 31 August, where Norway resumed full responsibility for the recovery and investigation, but Russian help was accepted. To allow the Russian workers access from the morning of 1 September, the crew was allowed to fly in and establish a base camp, but no work was to be done until Norwegian supervisors arrived in the morning. However, two people were observed at the wreck at about 20:00 CEST, who were brought to the Governors offices for questioning. As they were both members of the Russian team, it was decided that the base would be disbanded.(There was still fog on the plateau on 1 September, but by 15:00 CEST it was possible to fly a team there by helicopter. Because the fog stayed, the team retained work until 03:00 CEST in the night. In the following days, the fog lifted, making work and transport easier. By 5 September, all bodies had been recovered and the work at the plateau could be terminated. The recovery in the valley was completed two days later. The accident resulted in about 40 journalists staying in Svalbard to cover the story. The Norwegian authoritys costs related to the investigation and other activities related to the accident were estimated at 30 million krone (NOK).(All identification of people was performed in Troms, as a cooperation between Troms Police District, Kripos and the Hospital of North Norway. By 18 September, all people had been identified, and the bodies were transported to Russia and Ukraine on 20 September after a short memorial in Tromshallen.( An autopsy was performed on all crew members, without finding any abnormalities.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 36)The official responsibility for investigating the incident lay with the Investigation Board Norway (AIBN), although the investigation and report was a close cooperation with the Interstate Aviation Committee and to a lesser extent, the Federal Air Transport Agency. AIBN had the primary responsibility for investigations at the crash site, cooperation with the Norwegian police and the Norwegian Civil Aviation Administration, and writing the report. IAC was responsible for handling the investigations in Russia, the reading of the voice recorder, the data recorder, the relationship with Vnukovo Airlines and a test flight.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 4)CauseThe official investigation concluded that the flight, regarded as a flight into terrain, was caused by errors and that there was no fault with the aircraft.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 80) Contributing factors causing the accident were lack of a procedure for offset localizer approach for setting approach course on the HSIs. Thus, both HSIs were set wrong, which along with the deviation indicator hinted that the plane was being blown to the left and needed to adjust course to the right. Because he was in a stressed situation, the navigator set the GPS in the wrong mode. He also did not have sufficient time to recheck his work, allowing mistakes to happen, and his work was not monitored by the pilots. As the navigator was overworked, it was inappropriate for the first officer to transfer the responsibility of lateral control to him.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 83)The AFIS air controller has a different role in Norway than in Russia, and the crew were not aware that they were being given information and advice, rather than orders. Communication with AFIS was left with the navigator, which is a breach of norms. Communication between air control and the crew was problematic, since the crew lacked sufficient English skills. The pilot in command had insufficient resource management.( After the crew decided to carry out the approach to Runway 28, a new approach briefing was not accomplished. The aircraft overshot the centerline when turning inbound, because they did not try to intercept the outbound track from Advent. The crew showed a lack of situational awareness following their uncertainty of the aircraft position in relation to LLZ 28, caused by indications on the HSIs.(Accident Investigation Board Norway (1999): 84)Situational awareness was also reduced because the pilots did not have a chart in front of them at all times. The crew was not aware that they could check the aircraft location in relation to the centerline with a VDF. The crew probably put too much emphasis on the indications displayed by the GPS. The aircraft descended into mountainous terrain without control over the lateral navigation. Despite uncertainty and disagreement in the group, the approach was not abandoned, as the aircraft should have climbed to a safe altitude while the problem was solved.(AftermathOn 20 September, the surviving relatives of each deceased received 2 million rubles (RUB), about 400 States dollars (US$) for each deceased. Ukrainian relatives stated to Norwegian media that they had not received information about the cause and other issues surrounding the accident.() At the time, Ukraine was experiencing very high unemployment, and Arktikugol offered wages many times what was then offered in mainland Ukraine. Many miners not only had to support their immediate family, but also relatives. Vnukovo Airlines stated on Ukrainian television that the relatives would receive US$20,000 per deceased.() About a year after the accident, all relatives had been offered US$20,000, but about two thirds of them chose not to accept the amount, and instead started a process to sue the insurance company. Their lawyer, Gunnar Nerdrum, stated that according to both Norwegian and Russian law, they could demand at least US$140,000.()In February 1998, the Ministry of Justice stated that the relatives did not have a right to occupational injury compensation from the Norwegian National Insurance. Because of the Treaty, the archipelago is an free zone and Arktikugol is exempt from paying social insurance, so its employees did not have a right to Norwegian benefits. Had this been the case, widows would have received about NOK 600,000 per worker.() By 1998, a few of the relatives had accepted the US$20,000 compensation, while the rest of them were planning to sue both the airlines insurance company and Arktikugol. Among the issues in the case, which took place at at District Court, was whether the accident was to be considered a working accident, and thus result in injury compensation from the mining company.() In November, it was decided that the Ukrainians needed to make a guarantee for NOK 2.5 million to run the case, which they could not afford. They therefore had no alternative than to accept the proposal from the insurance company.() In June 1999, the parties agreed on a settlement, where the compensation was not disclosed to the public.() It was later disclosed that the settlement was about three times the initial offer from the insurance company.() In 1999, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs established a scholarship to help children who lost a parent in the accident to take senior secondary and tertiary education.()ReferencesBibliography* Airlines Flight 2801Airlines-vlucht 2801no:Operafjell-ulykkennn:Operafjellulykkalotu Vnukovo Airlines 2801-154   29  1996 
3950972
List_of_U.S._county_secession_proposals
This is a list of county secession proposals in the United States; that is, proposed new counties to be formed from existing counties within a given state. For counties which want to secede from their current state and join or create another, see of U.S. state secession proposals.Alaska* Chugiak and Eagle River are communities of Anchorage and located within its city limits.  Dating back to periods of community growth which occurred when the area was part of the former Greater Anchorage Area Borough, there have been sporadic attempts over the years to incorporate these communities separate from Anchorage.  One such attempt, the Chugiak-Eagle River Borough, incorporated on August 27, 1974 with an area of  and an estimated population of 5,832, before the incorporation was invalidated by the Supreme Court on April 14, 1975.()  Five months later, the GAAB and existing cities within its boundaries merged to form the Municipality of Anchorage.  Discussion has persisted over the years in Chugiak and Eagle River for these communities to secede from Anchorage.Arizona*Pearce, a state legislator, has proposed a bill which would ease county splits, as part of his effort to split off the East Valley (Mesa, Tempe, Chandler, Gilbert and Guadalupe) portion of Maricopa County. County splitting rules were made more restrictive after the formation of Paz County, Arizona in 1983, which required a significant state investment to keep the county running as the result of its small tax base.(http://www.azcentral.com/specials/special12/articles/0210supervisors-expansion10.html)*There is an ongoing movement in Havasu City to split from County.(http://www.lakehavasucnty.com/about.htm)*In the late 1930s, differences between mining and ranching interests in County, Arizona spurred a proposal to split the county, with the new countys seat at Wilcox, which the state Legislature ultimately rejected.(http://www.azleg.state.az.us/issues/senate/arizona%20county%20formation.htm)*In the 1980s, a bill was successfully passed in the state legislature to create an all Indian county out of the northern halves of Navajo and Apache Counties, and the northeastern half of Coconino County.  Non-Indian communities in the southern region of these counties felt that the Navajo and Hopi Nations do not pay a fair share in local taxes.  The bill was vetoed by then governor Babbitt, who placed a five year moratorium on its consideration.  Subsequent attempts to revive the bill failed and the issue never resurfaced.(AABE-Difficult race relations continue between Apaches and Whites)California*In California, three proposed county plans failed  in the 1990s: Redwood County (western parts of Mendocino and Sonoma counties), Tahoe County (eastern parts of Nevada, Placer and El Dorado counties) and Central Valley County (of western Merced and Fresno counties).*In California, there are 6 proposed counties across the Angeles Metropolitan Area, within Angeles County (about 4) and County, California (two North/West and East/South halves, its boundary on the Newport Freeway or Laguna Freeway).*County, California, to be formed from the northern portion of Barbara County, California.(MJEOL - Search)*Desert County, California, to be formed largely from northern Angeles County, California as well as portions of Bernardino County, California and County, California. Proposed by late state senator Pete Knight (cf.) in 2002.(http://www.webgazers.com/psvoltz/news298.html)(http://www.sen.ca.gov/ftp/sen/SENATOR/_ARCHIVE_2004/KNIGHT/KERNPRSS/022198.TXT)*A writer to the Angeles Times in 1997 indicated a sentiment from south County, California residents that they would seek to secede from the county if it insisted on building a new airport on the former site of Corps Air Station El Toro.(Noise News for Week of November 9, 1997) The airport plan was eventually discarded in favor of the County Great Park plan.*Prior to the formation of County, California, residents of California in 1870  pushed a bill in the state assembly for the creation of an County, California. The proposal had the support of Francisco.(Orange County - 1866 to 1888)*An attempt in the late 19th century (1870-80?) to create San Antonio County in present-day Los Angeles and San Bernardino counties.*In 2002, residents of the city of Corona proposed Corona County to include the western edge of Riverside County.*In the late 1980s, some residents of the Valley of Riverside County failed to create a new county: Cahuilla County.*In 1988, there was a serious effort, including a vote on the subject, to divide San Bernardino County into its urban Southwestern corner, which would have retained the name, and a new Mojave County to comprise the vast, sparsely populated Northern and Eastern portions.(http://articles.latimes.com/1988-05-27/news/mn-4334_1_county-services)*Proposed counties in the L.A. county: High Desert county north of the Pacific crest trail, Long Beach or Los Cerritos county(southeast corner) up to the Pomona freeway, San Gabriel county down to the Santa Ana freeway, South Bay or Palos Verdes county(southwest corner) and western corner of L.A. county where California is located could be Malibu or Topanga county.Georgia*County, Georgia once existed, but in the 1930s it merged (along with other counties and towns) with County, Georgia, in the 1930s to save money during the Depression. More recently, land-use and other divisions have inspired discussion of the re-establishment of Milton County.* In County there is an active movement for the secession of the more affluent Northern portion of the county, which feels it is poorly represented in the Lawrenceville government despite the large amount of tax revenue derived from the area.Hawaii*In 2006, residents of unincorporated west County, Hawaii, which currently encompasses all of Island, met to propose the formation of Hawaii County. The recent movement reportedly has the support of at least one state senator.(http://www.hawaiitribune-herald.com/articles/2006/01/31/local_news/local01.txt) Critics argue the regions concerns could be satisfied simply by corporation.Illinois*Lincoln County: Southern County, Illinois communities, upset at Chicago-centric policies of the county government, petitioned in 2004  to split off the southern portion of the county. The southern communities argue they are in financial ruin due to bad policies limiting their ability to attract business, but critics contend that the areas problems stem from rampant city corruption.(http://64.233.179.104/search?qcache:8bqI6OEjmcUJ:illinoisleader.com/news/newsview.asp%3Fc%3D20804)(http://www.google.com/search?qcache:M_0Yl3dxUdMJ:illinoisleader.com/news/newsview.asp%3Fc%3D20008)Indiana*In a 2004 meeting of the County, Indiana commissioners, the sentiment of splitting the county, in order to fairly distribute innkeepers tax, is alluded to, but rejected as an invalid matter for the council.(Commissioners Meeting)Kansas*Garfield County: In 1887, the area around Kansas and Kansas split from County, Kansas (now split among Lane, Finney, and Gray counties) and organized into Garfield County. Both towns were of equal influence, and contested the award of county seat. An election that year, which involved 20 City deputies including Masterson, found Ravanna to have the lead. However, Eminence discovered that illegal votes had been cast for Ravanna, and in 1889  the state supreme court overturned 60 votes, awarding Garfield County seat to Eminence. In a doomsday move, Ravanna countered by hiring surveyors to determine that the new countys land area was under the minimum allowed at the time. In 1893  the Kansas state legislature invalidated the county and annexed it to Finney. Today, both Ravanna and Eminence are towns.(1998 Kansas Profiles)(Kansas Counties)(Garfield County - KS-Cyclopedia - 1912)(Buffalo County - KS-Cyclopedia - 1912)Maryland*Throughout the history of County, Maryland and County, Maryland, the two most western counties in Maryland, residents have considered themselves West Virginians. Even though the counties have never been part of Virginia, most residents feel stronger family and cultural ties to West Virgina.  Due to the drastic difference in not only geography, income, population, and cultural norms between the eastern and western parts of Maryland, these residents often do not feel equally represented in the state assembly in Maryland.Massachusetts*Throughout the history of County, Massachusetts, the largest by area in the state, residents of the northern part of the county have pushed for a split. This never occurred, and is now a moot point as, like some other England counties, the county government has been dissolved and its responsibilities assumed by the state.Minnesota*Residents of Township, Minnesota began a petition to secede from County, Minnesota over plans to locate a waste disposal site in the area.(http://www.kued.org/skullvalley/documentary/interviews/overland3.html)*There appears to have been a proposal to split County, Minnesota in 2000, which prompted a change in county formation laws. http://www.angelfire.com/mn2/cupc/ http://www.pinecounty.org/Minutes/2003Minutes/082803Special.htm (http://www.ecm-inc.com/election2000/stories/November/8pine256.html)Nevada*Residents of County, Nevada, mainly in Nevada and Nevada, have pushed as recently as 2001 for a north-south county split, perhaps with the northern portion merging with County, Nevada. While laws making it easier to form new counties have passed since then, this split has not occurred.(Pahrump Valley Times - Nye Countys Largest Newspaper Circulation) Nye is the largest county in Nevada and the third largest in the entire U.S., though over 90% is federal land.New Jersey*The municipalities of western Essex County have discussed secession from the county, to create a new Essex County, spurred mainly by a belief that tax laws benefit the eastern portions of the county at the expense of the western municipalities. Currently, this idea is essentially a dead movement*The residents of South Jersey in the counties of Cape May, Cumberland, Salem, Atlantic, Camden, Gloucester, and Burlington have had a long resentment toward North Jersey under the opinion that they are being slighted and ignored by the state government, which is heavily weighted toward North Jersey. As recently as 1980 it a non-binding referendum proposing secession from Jersey was passed by these counties. It was also voted on in County, but did not pass in Ocean County.New York*County, New York, to be formed from northern County, New York and southern County, New York.*County, New York, to be formed from the rural eastern portion of County, New York.*While not technically a matter of county secession, County, New York, which encompasses Island and is a borough of York City, voted in 1990  to begin the process of seceding from the city.(The 1990 Elections: New York - Secession; Staten Island Votes a Resounding Yes on Taking Step Toward Separation - New York Times)Ohio*In 1818, residents of the Ohio greater area petitioned the state legislature for a new county seated at the city and formed from parts of County, Ohio, County, Ohio and County, Ohio. The proposal was rejected.(Ol Jakob-First Generation)Oregon*In 2001, David Dillon, editor of the North Coast Citizen newspaper, proposed a new county be formed from the northern portion of County, Oregon. Discussion and research on the new county, which was never named, stalled in 2002.(newcounty.com)*In 1984, an effort was stopped by its promoter Wilbur Ternyik at the request of the governor as it was to assured to succeed in forming McCall County out of the western portion of Lane County and Douglas County.  Lane County alone is the size of Connecticut or of Delaware and Island combined; 4620 square miles.(Register-Guard, June 16, 1984, News June 20, 1984, Oregonian, June 28, 1984)*In 2005, was the next effort in the 100 year long desire for the western portion to gain independence from the Eugene centered/serving Lane County.  This effort was to take a quarter of Lane County forming Siuslaw County; roughly 1,000 square miles.  Chief petitioner Keith Stanton was unable to gather the needed 50%+1 signatures of those registered to vote and living within the proposed new county area.  No foundation work was done in the hopes the citizens knew what they wanted and only needed to learn it was within their grasp.(Register-Guard, September 30, 2005 full page coverage, News Opinion Page, April 2005 though May 2006)Tennessee*Neshoba County, to be formed from part of County, Tennessee. Its formation was threatened in 1990  by rural communities after the city of Tennessee proposed that the citys financially struggling school district merge with that of the county, which continues to be repeatedly considered.Virginia*County, Virginia, to be formed from western County, Virginia, in response to the voiding of zoning measures intended to slow growth in the area.*During the desegregation era, the town of Virginia threatened to secede from County, Virginia after a consolidated and integrated county high school was built in the late 1950s.(http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd-121098-154942/unrestricted/DISSERTATION.PDF)Washington*County, Washington, to be formed in the rural eastern portion of County, Washington, leaving some portion of the Seattle metropolitan area behind.(Cascade County > Home)*County, Washington, a prior, similar proposal in King County.*County, Washington, to be formed from the eastern portion of County, Washington. Freedom has gone so far as to form a provisional county government.*County, Washington, to be formed from southeastern Snohomish and northeastern King counties.*Pioneer County, Washington, to be formed from the northwest corner of County, Washington.*County, Washington, to be formed form the east portion of Whatcom County. Both Pioneer and Independence movements cite poor services and oppressive property regulations, plus favoritism towards Washington as reasons for their proposals. Both are rumored to be backed by land developers.(Northwest Citizen)West VirginiaWestern Greenbrier County, Virginia, to be formed from County, West Virginia.  This political subdivision of the State of West Virginia shall be accomplished by the separation of one or more of the westernmost districts from the existing county.  An official name for the county and a county seat have not been selected.  Presently, the movement toward separation is not formally organized and is little more than dialog in social circles.  Residents cite poor services and oppressive property regulations emanating from the county seat.  A glimpse of the western end of the county reveals an area that is culturally stagnant, economically impoverished, and politically disenfranchised.  A demographic observation of the area is that of a predominantly low income, blue collar, working class community.  Poor infrastructure and little economic development contribute to this areas condition.  Separation from the more affluent and economically vibrant eastern end of the county would give the western end a fresh start.Wyoming*Wind River County, to be formed from eastern County, Wyoming, with county seat at Wyoming. Riverton and Wyoming, which as county seat would remain in Fremont County, are rival towns.(Wyoming City Wants its Own County | Growth & Public Policy | New West Network)*Residents of Wyoming proposed a split from County, Wyoming in 2005.*In 2004, state senator Cooper introduced a bill to form Fossil County from the southern half of County, Wyoming, which failed.Additional reference: http://www.casperstartribune.net/articles/2006/01/15/news/b8e59aea3d9f34d9872570f600269668.txtSee also*of U.S. state secession proposalsReferences
3959461
Shaft-sinking
#REDIRECT mining
3969528
Pinecone_Burke_Provincial_Park
Pinecone Burke Provincial Park is a park in Columbia, Canada. It extends from the southwest corner of Provincial Park, west of Lake and River to include Burke Mountain in the City of Coquitlam. Most of the park is unserviced wilderness with very rough trails such as the Fools Gold Trail in the Valley. There is canoe access to Slough and from there hiking trails that lead to Lake, and a network of old logging roads, hiking and mountain biking trails on Burke Mountain(BC Parks, map).One hundred years ago, the Canadian Robert Dollar Company of Dollarton logged the lower slopes of Burke Mountain with a steam railway. Because of this thepeak was called Dollar Mountain by the early residents.   Rail lines snaked in from Moody along the sidehill of Westwood slope, across the Coquitlam River ona trestle and up to the timber on Burke Mountain.  As for many years, the area was depopulated bush logging and gravel mining continued with vigour.The highest mountain in the park is Peak (Canadian Mountain Encyclopedia) 2027 m (6650 ft).The Park contains parts of the traditional territory of the Katzie first nation. (NotesReferences* * * External links*Spaces for Nature - Pinecone Burke
3977224
The_Stars_Look_Down
 isbn          0-450-00497-XThe Stars Look Down is a 1935 novel by J. Cronin which chronicles various injustices in an English mining community. A film version was produced in 1939, and television adaptations include both Italian (1971) and British (1975) versions.The novel is set in Sleescale, a mining town on the coast of Northumberland, as well as in Tynecastle (upon Tyne).  While Sleescale is a fictional locale, it is based on an excellent knowledge of similar places and people.  Cronin, a Scot, served as Medical Inspector of Mines in the Wales Valleys during the 1920s.Beginning before War I and extending into the 1930s, the story shows the different careers of several individuals: principally, a miners son who aspires to defend his people via politics, a miner who becomes a businessman, and the mine owners son in conflict with his domineering father. Plot summary The novel centres on three very different men:* David Fenwick comes from a mining family but is drawn towards politics, aspiring to help his people, and becomes a strong supporter of nationalisation.  Initially, he finishes up his baccalaureate degree and is a teacher at a school for the children of miners.* Joe Gowlan begins as a miner, drifts and then becomes upwardly mobile as a bookies assistant and a war-profiteer.* Arthur Barras is the son of Richard Barras, the unscrupulous owner of the Neptune Colliery.  He is unhappy with his fathers values but also feels too weak to do much about it.Reactions to the failure of industrial action on safety issues in the coal mines are crystallized in the characters of Davey and Joe, who take vastly different routes in escaping from the working class.  While Davey becomes an MP in order to fight for nationalisation of the mines, Joe essentially joins the mine owners.Jenny Sunley is Daveys indifferent wife who craves social status, and other characters have short but distinct tales of their own.  Cronin shows a broad sympathy for the workers and a dislike of the bosses, but also allows that at least some of the bosses can be decent at a personal level.Central to the story is the Neptune coal mine and a catastrophe that occurs there.  The War is also a factor: do you volunteer to fight, volunteer for non-military duties, use trickery to evade service or openly defy the system by refusing call-up?  There is a brief description of one of the tribunals that examined conscientious objectors, often refusing to accept their objection as valid.  There is also a clear commitment to the idea of nationalising the mines, replacing the mass of small private owners that existed at the time.The novel ends with most of the men much changed, and it is an excellent description of working-class life in the North of England during that period.Memorable quotesThe cage dropped. It dropped suddenly, swiftly, into the hidden darkness. And the sound of its falling rose out of that darkness like a great sigh which mounted towards the furthermost stars.AdaptationsThe Stars Look Down is a 1940 film adapted from the novel. Co-scripted by Cronin and directed by Reed, the film stars Redgrave as the idealistic Davey Fenwick and Lockwood as his wife.  Their relationship, which is secondary in the novel, is foregrounded in the film.  The American release includes narration by Barrymore.  It is a York Times Critics Pick and is listed in The New York Times Guide to the Best 1,000 Movies Ever Made.Italiana adapted the novel as a miniseries in 1971 under the title le stelle stanno a guardare. The dramatization stars Maria Guerrini as Davey Fenwick, Checchi as Robert Fenwick, Giannini as Arthur Barras and Maria Guarnieri as Jenny Sunley. This version was written and directed by Giulio Majano.In 1975, Television produced The Stars Look Down as a 13 episode series. This production was written by Plater and directed by Joff and Grint.The 2000 film Elliot was inspired in part by Cronins story and similarly focuses on a community of coal miners during a strike in East England, as well as on a miners son who goes against the grain. Elliot the Musical s opening sequence, entitled The Stars Look Down, pays tribute to Cronins novel.  In 2004, North Eastern playwright Alex Ferguson adapted the novel for NTC Theatre Company. An ensemble of five actors played all the parts: Alan Park (Joe Gowlan/Arthur Barras), Ross Waiton (Davie Fenwick), Kim Evans (Jenny Sunley/Hughie Fenwick), Jackie Fielding (Martha Fenwick), and Steve Wedd (Robert Fenwick/Richard Barras). Directed by Gillian Hambleton, the play met with resounding critical success, breathing new life into Cronins timeless tale.References in other worksIn Sayers Honeymoon, published the same year as Cronins book, Peter Wimseys eccentric mother starts reading The Stars Look Down, but finds it too depressing.References*Vermilye, Jerry. The Great British Films. Citadel Press, 1978, pp 4951. ISBN 080650661X*Scotsman interview (2002)*The Stars Look Down at the BFI Film & TV DatabaseStars Look Downle regard des toilesle stelle stanno a guardare (romanzo)
3982027
Charles_J._Hughes,_Jr.
DemocraticCharles James Hughes, Jr. (February 16, 1853 January 11, 1911) was a Democratic U.S. Senator from Colorado.Born in Missouri, Hughes attended the common schools and graduated from Richmond College in 1871. He then graduated from the law department of the of Missouri in Columbia in 1873, was admitted to the bar in 1877, and commenced practice at Missouri. He moved to Colorado in 1879.Hughes was a elector on the Democratic ticket in 1900. He was professor of mining law in the law school of the of Denver and University. He was elected as a Democrat to the States Senate and served from March 4, 1909, until his death in Denver on January 11, 1911. He was interred in Fairmount Cemetery, Denver.Sources** U.S. Congress. Memorial Addresses. 61st Cong., 3rd sess. from 1910 to 1911. D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1911.J. HughesJ. Hughes
3987467
History_of_Laos_since_1945
Image:Phetxarat.jpg|thumb|350px|Good-luck charms of Prince Phetxart, who many Lao believe possessed magical powers, are widely sold in Laos todayFor Laotian history before 1945, see of Laos to 1945.Note: this article follows the system for transliterating Lao names used in Martin Stuart-Foxs History of Laos. It may differ from systems used in other articles.----The Kingdom of LaosOn 27 August 1945 Prince Phetxart took charge of Chan from the Japanese, although as Minister of Phrabng he had no authority outside the Kingdoms borders. The French were already in control of Luang Phrabng, and with the support of the Prince of Champsak they were also regaining control in the south. When it became clear that the King would not budge from his loyalty to France, Phetxart (who had no fondness for the King and the Crown Prince) unilaterally declared the unification of the country, nominally under the crown of Luang Phrabng, and then declared Lao independence. In September the Chinese Army arrived to find that a Lao government of sorts was in command of Viang Chan. Uncertain what to do, the Chinese commander recognised Phetxart, and in Luang Phrabng the Chinese disarmed the French forces. But the Allied governments refused to recognise Phetxarts government, and in October de Gaulle advised the King by telegram to dismiss him as Prime Minister of Luang Phrabng. In retaliation, Phetxart declared the King deposed. Phetxart put his younger half-brother Suphnuvong in charge of organising the defence of the new independent Laos with the titles Minister of Defence and Interior. Suphnuvong was married to a Vietnamese and had spent most of the war in Vietnam, where he had become a close supporter and ally of Chi Minh. On his advice Hos forces supported Phetxarts government, but they could spare few forces from the struggle against the French in Vietnam, which was always their first priority. Phetxarts brother Suvannaphm became Minister for Public Works. Among those who came from Vietnam with Suphnuvong was Kaisn Phomvihn, half-Vietnamese and a dedicated communist, who in time became the leader of the Lao communists and Vietnams principal agent in Laos. Thus by the end of 1945 all the leaders of the next 30 years of political conflict were in place.But the pretensions of the Lao Issara government were largely illusory. Only the presence of the Chinese army in occupation of the northern half of the country was preventing the French from attacking Viang Chan from their base in the south of the country. Thailand and the Allies were suspicious of the apparent role of communists in the government, although in reality this was very slight. In March 1946 the Chinese were finally persuaded to stop plundering the country and go home, and this was the signal for the French to advance to Savannakht. Suphnuvong led his motley forces to meet the French before they got to Viang Chan, but at Thkhaek they were routed, and Suphnuvong himself badly wounded. The Lao Issara government fled to Thailand and set up a government in exile in Bangkok. On 24 April the French occupied Viang Chan, and in mid May they arrived in Luang Phrabng to rescue the grateful King. As a reward for his loyalty, in August the French proclaimed him King of Laos. The of Champsak was abolished, and Prince Bunm na Champsak compensated with the title Inspector-General of the Kingdom. The French now made a belated effort to give Laos the institutions of a modern state. The Garde Indigne was replaced by a Lao National Guard, and a Lao police force established. Elections for a Constituent Assembly, on the basis of universal male suffrage, were held in December 1946, and in 1947 the Assembly adopted a constitution confirming the status of Laos as a constitutional monarchy and an autonomous state within the Union. A senior high school was opened in Viang Chan, and new schools opened in Pkx, Savannakht and Luang Phrabng. New hospitals and clinics were also established, although there was an acute shortage of qualified staff for them. A crash program to train more Lao civil servants was also instituted. In August 1947 elections were held for the National Assembly, and 35 deputies were elected. A royal relative, Prince Suvannart, became Minister of Laos at the head of a cabinet composed entirely of members of influential Lao-Lum families. This was to remain a characteristic of Lao politics. Various transient political parties came and went, but the same 20-odd families alternated in office, feuding with each other over the spoils of office. In 1949, as the French position in Vietnam worsened and the continuing goodwill of the Lao became more important, further concessions were made. Lao ministers took control of all government functions except foreign affairs and defence, although the almost total dependence of the economy on French aid made this new independence more apparent than real. Finally, in February 1950, Laos was formally declared an independent state, and was recognised as such by the States and Britain. Laos applied to join the Nations, but its application was vetoed by the Union. None of these measures disguised the fact that France remained in essential control of the country. Foreign affairs, defence and finance remained under de facto French control, and justice was only slowly devolved to Lao ministers. Most importantly, the Army retained the right to operate freely in Laos, and to issue orders to Lao forces without reference to Lao ministers. Meanwhile, the Lao Issara government-in-exile planned a nationalist revolt against the French and what they saw as their Lao puppets in Viang Chan. For a time the Lao Issara forces, under the command of Suphnuvong, were able to operate from bases in Thailand, and achieved some successes, particularly around Savannakht. But in November 1947 a military coup in Bangkok brought Marshall Phibun back to power. Encouraged by the Americans, he sought to repair Thailands relations with France, and shut down the Lao Issara bases. The Lao Issara could now only mount operations into Laos from territory controlled by the Vietnamese Communists, but this came at a political price which the non-communist Lao Issara leaders, Phetxart and Suvannaphm, were not prepared to pay. In January 1949 Lao Communists led by Kaisn established a new Communist-controlled Lao military force in Vietnam, nominally loyal to the Lao Issara government but in fact answerable to the Communist Party. Suphnuvong sided with the Communists over control of this new force, and this led rapidly to a split in the Lao Issara. In July 1949 the non-communist leaders of the Lao Issara declared the government-in-exile dissolved, and most of its members, led by Suvannaphm, returned to Laos under an amnesty. Only Phetxart remained in exile, but by now he had lost his previous influence. In August 1951, Suvannaphm became Prime Minister for the first time, confirming his status as the new leader of the non-communist Lao.Communism in LaosImage:Kaison.jpg|thumb|350px|Phomvihn, whose portrait appears Lao banknotes of 2,000 to 50,000 kip.The Indochinese Communist Party (ICP) was founded by Ho Chi Minh and others in Kong in 1930. Its membership was at first entirely Vietnamese, but, as its name indicates, it was given responsibility by the International in Moscow for the whole of Indochina. During the 1930s it recruited a handful of Lao members, mainly teachers and other middle-ranking civil servants with some western education. But Laos offered few opportunities for communism. It had few wage labourers apart from some in the tin-mining industry. There was no agrarian question in Laos: more than 90 percent of Lao were rice-farmers who owned their own land. There were no landlords as in China and no landless rural proletariat. The only grievance the communists could exploit was colonial rule, but, as has been seen, until 1940 most Lao regarded the French as a necessary protection against the Siamese and Vietnamese, and when Lao nationalism did emerge it was under the leadership of aristocrats such as Phetxart and Suvannaphm. The fact that communism in Laos was closely associated with the Vietnamese did not recommend it to most Lao.Nevertheless, by the late 1940s the ICP had recruited a core of activists, some of them part-Vietnamese, such as Kaisn, others married to Vietnamese, such as Phumsavan. The discrediting of the French and the failure of the Lao Issara government gave them their opportunity, because after 1949 the struggle against colonial rule could only be carried on from bases in Vietnam and with the support of the Vietnamese communists. In August 1950 the communists established a front organisation, the Free Laos Front (Naeo Lao Issara), under the presidency of Suphnuvong. This in turn formed a Resistance Government of the Lao Homeland. The phrase Lao (Lao Homeland) thus became established as the general name of the Lao communist movement until 1975. The communists shrewdly promoted representatives of the upland ethnic minorities to leadership positions in the Free Laos Front. These included Faidng Lbliayao, a leader of the people of the north, and Sthon Kommadam, son of the southern rebel Kommadam and a leader of the southern Lao-Thoeng. Since the communist base areas were mainly inhabited by minority peoples, this helped consolidate support in these areas. But the communist leadership remained firmly in Lao-Lum hands. When in 1955 a separate Lao communist party was created (the Peoples Revolutionary Party or Phak Paxxon Lao), with Kaisn as General Secretary and Nhak as his deputy, all the members of the Politburo were Lao-Lum.The Lao communist party remained under the supervision of the Vietnamese party, and throughout the following twenty years of warfare the Patht Lao was dependent on Vietnam for arms, money and training. A large number of Vietnamese forces fought alongside the Patht Lao, and Vietnamese advisors usually accompanied Patht Lao military commanders. The anti-communist Lao government always accused the Patht Lao of being Vietnamese puppets, but this was an over-simplification. The Lao and Vietnamese communists were fighting for the same goals - first the eviction of the French, then the establishment of socialism, and the Lao knew they could not achieve either of these objectives on their own. Communist ideology taught that proletarian internationalism was a duty of all communists. The Lao communists freely accepted Vietnamese leadership as the quickest and indeed only way to achieve their aims. Even after they had overthrown the government, the Patht Lao depended on Vietnamese soldiers and political advisors to keep control of the country. Their government had a relationship with Vietnam similar to that of the Eastern European Communist governments to the Soviet Union. The price they paid for Vietnamese support was the hostility of the majority of the Lao-Lum, who disliked the Vietnamese more than they did the French. It was not until the later 1960s that the Patht Lao began to gain support in the Lao-Lum areas.Geneva and the First Coalitionthumb|350px|The former Royal Palace in Luang Phrabng, now a museumThe early 1950s saw continuing instability in the Lao government in Viang Chan. The influx of French forces, accompanied by much French and American aid money, fuelled an economic boom, accompanied by high inflation, in the towns, but this did little to benefit the peasant majority. The diversion of funds to military purposes retarded development of fields like health and education. The government remained weak and faction-ridden, and also increasingly corrupt as leading politicians found ways for themselves and their relatives to profit from the foreign money pouring into the country. Suvannaphm remained the leading non-communist politician and retained the confidence of the King, but right-wingers, led by Bunm na Champsak, opposed his policy of coalition and reconciliation with the Patht Lao. Nevertheless Lao independence, at first a facade for continued French rule, gradually became a reality.By late 1953 the Patht Lao, with Vietnamese aid, had gained control over a large area of territory, albeit thinly populated, in the mountainous areas along the Vietnamese border, and also over some areas in the south, where rule from Viang Chan had never been popular. The decline of French power left the Royal Lao government vulnerable, and Patht Lao and Vietnamese forces advanced to within 30 km of Luang Phrabng. As the French became increasingly bogged down in Vietnam, political opposition in France to the Indochina war grew stronger. In May 1954 the French suffered a defeat at Bien Phu in northern Vietnam which, while of no great consequence militarily, was a political disaster. The French government resigned and Mends-France became Prime Minister on a policy of getting out of Indochina. An international conference on Indochina had already been convened in Geneva, and as it met it was confronted with the new situation following Dien Bien Phu. Laos was a secondary issue at Geneva, and the decisions made about Laos were dictated by the settlement in Vietnam. Foreign Minister Phuy Xananikn represented the Lao government and Nhak represented the Patht Lao (as part of the Vietnamese communist delegation), but they were little more than observers of decisions made by the great powers. It was agreed to make Laos an independent, neutral country with a coalition government representing all parties including the Patht Lao. A ceasefire was to be concluded, and this was to be followed by the withdrawal of all foreign forces, the disbanding of the Patht Lao army, the formation of a coalition government, and free elections. When news of this agreement reached Laos, there was violent anger among anti-communist politicians, which focused on Phuy for having agreed to these terms. In September a gang funded by right-wing elements attempted to assassinate Phuy. He was slightly wounded, but Defence Minister Ku Vravong was killed. The resultant crisis forced Suvannaphm to resign, and Katy Don Sasorit formed a new government. Two months after the Geneva conference, North Vietnam began plotting against the government of Laos. A military organization was created called Group 100. Its headquarters was established at Ban Namo. Its purpose was to organize, train, direct and supply the army of the Patht Lao. North Vietnam had no particular interest in the Geneva Conference or in the creating a neutral Laos other than in their use in strengthening their grip on the eastern portions of the country.Katy was a much less subtle figure than Suvannaphm, and he found the task of implementing the Geneva agreements beyond him. The essential problem was that although the French forces departed on schedule, the Vietnamese forces supporting the Patht Lao in their upland base areas did not, and the Lao government had no means of forcing them to do so. Under the agreements, the Patht Lao forces were supposed to assemble in Houaphan and Phongsl provinces before disbanding. Instead the Patht Lao and the Vietnamese continued to treat these provinces as their own liberated areas, refusing to allow government officials to exercise authority, and also evicting the local Hmong forces which had supported the French and were now loyal to the Lao government. They also maintained their underground forces in the south. After a year of stalemate, the government went ahead with elections in the rest of the country in December 1955. After the elections Katys government was defeated in the new National Assembly, and Suvannaphm returned to office, still determined to create a neutralist coalition government. Suvannaphm always believed that the Lao, if left alone, could settle their own differences, and that he could come to an agreement with his half-brother Suphnuvong.The United States did not ratify the Geneva agreements, and the Eisenhower administration, particularly the militantly anti-communist Secretary of State, Foster Dulles, shared the views of the right-wing Lao politicians. Under Dulless influence the U.S. had backed the French war in Vietnam, and now that the French were leaving he was determined that the U.S. would take over Frances role of supporting anti-communist forces in Vietnam and preventing Ho Chi Minhs forces taking over southern Vietnam. This, he believed, necessitated maintaining an anti-communist government in Laos and preventing Vietnam using Laos as a transport route to south Vietnam.  To get around the prohibitions of the Geneva agreements  which the United States had pledged to honor  the U.S. Department of Defense in December 1955 established a disguised military mission in Vientiane called the Programs Evaluation Office (PEO). The PEO became operational on December 13, 1955 and worked under the cover of the civilian aid mission and was staffed by military personnel and headed by a general officer, all of whom wore civilian clothes and had been removed from Department of Defense rosters of active service personnel.  Over the 1955-61 period, the PEO gradually supplanted the French military mission in providing equipment and training to the Royal Lao Army and the anti-communist Hmong Tribe.  In this way, the U.S. was footing the entire cost of keeping the Royal Lao Army in the field in the same way that the Soviets and Vietnamese footed the entire cost of the Patht Lao, and the Intelligence Agency (CIA) was providing intelligence and political direction. The U.S. therefore strongly opposed Suvannaphms efforts to bring the Patht Lao into the government and to make Laos a neutral country. What neutrality meant in practice was allowing permanent Vietnamese occupation of the east of the country and allowing the Patht Lao to keep their army in the field. Suvannaphms efforts to settle the conflict in Laos always failed due to the refusal of the Vietnamese to leave and the refusal of the Patht Lao to disarm.In August 1956 Suvannaphm reached an agreement with Suphnuvong. He was helped by his elder brother Prince Phetxart, who returned to Laos in 1956 after ten years in exile, and played the role of mediator and elder statesman until his death in 1959. A coalition government was formed in which Suphnuvong became Minister for Planning and Reconstruction, and another Patht Lao leader, Phm Vongvichit (190994) was Minister for Religion and Fine Arts. The Patht Lao agreed to allow the reintegration of Houaphan and Phongsl provinces, and to integrate the Patht Lao army into the Royal Lao Army. Guarantees were given that Laos would be a neutral country and would not allow its territory to be used as a base for aggression against any of its neighbours. The coalition government formally took office in November, and in May 1958 reasonably free elections were held, at which the Patht Lao won nine seats in the National Assembly out of 21 contested. Suphnuvong won the Viang Chan seat with the highest vote of any candidate in the country.The 1956 agreement was welcomed by France, Britain, the Soviet Union, China and both Vietnamese governments. The U.S. was muted in its opposition, and did not carry out previous threats to cut off aid if the Patht Lao joined the government. But behind the scenes the U.S. embassy continued to encourage anti-communist Lao politicians to question the agreement. The Vietnamese and Lao communists also had no intention of honouring the spirit of the 1956 agreement, which they saw in purely tactical terms. Some Patht Lao weapons were handed over, and two battalions of Patht Lao troops were nominally designated as units of the Royal Lao Army. But the bulk of the Patht Lao forces, led by Kaisn, withdrew to bases on the Vietnamese border to await developments. The Vietnamese also continued to use the mountains of the frontier zone as a safe haven and transport route (later known as the Chi Minh trail). Suvannaphm turned a blind eye to this rather than risk the unity of his government, but the CIA was of course fully aware of these facts. U.S. aid, directed by the U.S. Agency for International Aid (USAID), continued at the rate of US$40 million a year (in a country of 3 million people), but deliberately bypassed Suphnuvongs Ministry for Planning and Reconstruction and was channelled to the Army and friendly politicians.In December 1958, North Vietnamese Army units crossed into Laos and took by force several villages in Xpn District. As contrasted to their other occupations, in this instance North Vietnam began flying their flag over the territory and officially announced it was part of Vietnam. Though the government was granted extraordinary powers to deal with the crisis by the National Assembly, it did nothing. And in doing nothing, it lost much of its credibility with the patriotic parties.In July 1959, the North Vietnamese army increased its participation in attacks on government forces. The attacks usually took the form of North Vietnamese regulars attacking a defended position, overcoming most of the resistance and then letting their Patht Lao allies claim the victory by occupying the position. Two months later, North Vietnam created a new organization known as Group 959 located inside Laos at Na Kai. Group 959 became in effect the Vietnamese supreme command controlling, organizing and equipping the Pathet Lao. The group would continue to exist until 1968 when it was rendered redundant through the takeover by North Vietnams army of the war inside Laos.Partly as a result of corruption in the distribution of international aid, and partly because of the venal and unreliable character of many Lao politicians, Suvannaphms government soon ran into difficulties. The U.S. and other aid donors insisted on currency reform to stem the runaway inflation which they themselves had caused by pumping money into such an underdeveloped economy. Suvannaphm resisted, fearing the effect that devaluation would have on the Lao people. Finally in August 1958 the U.S. suspended aid payments, which the anti-coalition and opportunist forces in the Assembly took as a signal to bring down Suvannaphm. Following his resignation Phuy Xananikn, who now had the support of the U.S. Embassy, again became Prime Minister, and the Patht Lao ministers were not re-appointed. The new Defence Minister was Phm Nsavan, a right-winger closely aligned with the Americans. Under his command the army once again became an anti-communist force. The two ex-Patht Lao battalions immediately reverted to the Patht Lao. In December Phuy partly suspended the constitution and began to rule under emergency powers, which he used to purge Patht Lao supporters from the civil service, and to arrest Suphnuvong and the other Patht Lao leaders in Viang Chan. In July 1959 fighting soon broke out all over the country. At this juncture the elderly King Ssavngvong died and was succeeded by his son Savngvatthan, who was as pro-American as his father had been pro-French, and well-known for his prophecy that he would be the last King of Laos.Vietnamese InvasionThe occupation by North Vietnamese security forces in December 1958 of several villages in Xpn District near the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) between Vietnam and Vietnam was an ominous development. The RLG immediately protested the flying of the North Vietnamese flag on Laotian territory. Hanoi claimed the villages had historically been part of Vietnam. With regard to precedent, this was a decidedly modest claim; nonetheless, it represented a unilateral reinterpretation of the French map used by the Gia Armistice Commission in the summer of 1954 to draw the DMZ, and, backed by force of arms, constituted nothing less than aggression. Phoui received extraordinary powers from the National Assembly to deal with the crisis. But the failure to regain their lost territory rankled the Laotian nationalists, who were hoping for a greater degree of United States . Fighting broke out all along the border with North Vietnam. North Vietnamese regular army units participated in attacks on July 2831, 1959. These operations established a pattern of North Vietnamese forces leading the attack on a strong point, then falling back and letting the Pathet Lao remain in place once resistance to the advance had been broken. The tactic had the advantage of concealing from view the North Vietnamese presence. Rumors of North Vietnamese in the vicinity often had a terrifying effect, however. Among the men who heard such rumors in the mountains of Houaphan Province that summer was a young Royal Lao Army captain named Le. Kong Le had two companies of the Paratroop Battalion out on patrol almost on the North Vietnamese border. When they returned to Nua without encountering the enemy, they found that the garrison had decamped, leaving the town undefended. The Vietnamese partys strategy was by now decided with regard to South Vietnam. At the same time, the party outlined a role for the LPP that was supportive of North Vietnam, in addition to the LPPs role as leader of the revolution in Laos. Hanois southern strategy opened the first tracks through the extremely rugged terrain of Xpn district in mid-1959 of what was to become the Chi Minh Trail.The failure of neutralismDespite its repression of the Patht Lao, Phuys government did not give the right-wingers the sort of power they wanted, and in December Phm Nsavan staged Laoss first military coup. Viang Chan was occupied and Phuy arrested, but Phm was forced to back down when the King, at the urging of western ambassadors, refused to appoint him Prime Minister. A compromise was reached whereby a royal relative, Prince Vongkotrattana, became nominal Prime Minister while Phm remained Defence Minister and became the real power in the government. The new government was at once embarrassed by the dramatic escape of Suphnuvong and the other Patht Lao leaders from prison - they had converted their guards, who fled with them to Vietnam. The government was also opposed by elements of the army which continued to support Suvannaphm and his neutralist policies. On August 9, 1960, led by Captain Lae, they staged a lightning coup, demanding that the National Assembly meet and reinstate Suvannaphm. Faced with an angry mob supporting the coup, the Assembly complied, and Suvannaphm formed his third government. The PEO was immediately evacuated by Air America.  In an attempt to neutralise right-wing opposition, Suvannaphm offered to include Phm Nsavan in the new government, but instead Phm went south to join Bunm na Champsak in forming an anti-communist Revolutionary Committee with U.S. backing.Kngs coup split the army, with some garrisons supporting him and some supporting Phm. Since the Americans were paying the armys bills, however, Kngs units could not sustain themselves for long, and had no choice but to seek an alliance with the Patht Lao, a move which Suvannaphm supported in dramatic fashion by flying to the Patht Lao headquarters at Neua in the mountains to issue a joint appeal with Suphnuvong for Lao unity and neutralism. This was a great propaganda coup for the Patht Lao, and led to a renewed Patht Lao - Vietnamese advance which soon occupied most of the north and east of the country. For the first time the Patht Lao began receiving substantial Soviet military and financial aid, and Soviet advisors appeared in Laos. For the U.S., this was a signal for all-out war. Massive aid was sent to Phm and Bunm in the south, and in October they advanced towards Viang Chan. A quorum of the National Assembly met at Savnannakht and declared Suvannaphm deposed and replaced by Bunm. In December the rightist army reached Viang Chan and after three days heavy fighting, in which about 500 people were killed, took the city. Suvannaphm fled to Cambodia, while Kngs forces withdrew to the Patht Lao areas, which now took in a large portion of the country.At this point the international political climate changed with the end of the Eisenhower Administration and the inauguration of F. Kennedy. The Kennedy Administration took the view that American interests were best served by ending the Lao conflict through the enforcement of the Geneva agreements of 1956, a policy Kennedy agreed on at his summit with Khrushchev in Vienna in June 1961. As a result the Geneva conference reconvened, but both the Americans and the Soviets had some trouble getting their puppets to agree to compromise. Phm and Bunm rightly feared that any agreement would rob them of their military victory and bring the despised Suvannaphm back to power. It took serious threats from the U.S. Embassy and the Thai military to force their compliance. The Patht Lao believed they were on the verge of conquering the whole country, and late 1961 they began an offensive in Namth province which soon routed Phms forces. But communist discipline held and they agreed to a compromise in which they had no real faith. In June Suvannaphm, Suphnuvong and Bunm met in the of Jars and agreed to a government of eleven neutralists, four rightists and four Patht Lao. Bunm retired from politics, and Suphnuvong and Phm became deputy prime ministers in Suvannaphms fourth government, which took office in June 1962 with the support of all the powers.Even before the Second Coalition government took office, however, its principal sponsors in the U.S. were losing faith in its value. As the War began to escalate, the use of the Ho Chi Minh trail as a supply route from North Vietnam to the communist forces in the south increased, and it became obvious that the Vietnamese had no intention of withdrawing their forces from Laos as they had twice agreed at Geneva to do. For North Vietnam, the use of Lao territory was a strategic necessity, and not something on which they would compromise. Agreements meant nothing to them. Further, they had no particular respect for the idea of an independent Laos. By late 1962 it was therefore also becoming a necessity for the U.S. to prevent this. The Soviets and Vietnamese continued to openly aid to the Patht Lao, while the U.S. continued to arm and train Hmong irregular forces under Pao in the Plain of Jars. There was no attempt to reintegrate the Patht Lao areas with the rest of Laos, and the Patht Lao did not even pretend to disarm their forces. The neutralist forces, commanded by Kng, agreed to accept U.S. aid, which caused a split within the neutralist ranks, with some going over to the Patht Lao. By April 1963 fighting had broken out again in the Plain of Jars. By the end of the year fighting was widespread, the Patht Lao was again advancing, and the neutralists were being squeezed out as a political and military force. In April 1964 there was another attempt at a rightist coup, led by General Athai, commander of the Viang Chan garrison and an ally of Phm. Suvannaphm was briefly arrested, but when the Americans refused support to the coup it collapsed, but the Patht Lao ministers left the capital and did not return, effectively ending the Coalition government.Laos as a battlefieldImage:Patuxay.JPG|thumb|350px|The Victory Arch (Patuxay) in Viang Chan, built during the years of the Indochina war. The arch is known as the vertical runway, because it was built with concrete donated by the United States for a new airport. It was never completed and even the official plaque describes it as a monster of concrete.Between 1964 and 1968 the conflict in Laos was essentially between the U.S.-supported government forces and the Patht Lao, supplied by Vietnam. The Patht Lao in these years was not a real threat to the government. The real problem for the government was corruption and warlordism within the national army. Regional army commanders did not cooperate with each other effectively and spent more time on political maneuvers than on fighting the Patht Lao. Suvannaphms government was an unwilling prisoner of events. Suvannaphm continued to argue for a neutralised Laos, and both sides paid lip-service to this ideal, but neither was prepared to yield any part of its strategic position to achieve it. In particular, the North Vietnamese had no intention of withdrawing any part of their army from the areas of the country it occupied.Suvannaphm remained in office, despite frequent threats to resign, because both the U.S. and the North Vietnamese preferred him to anyone else. The U.S. no longer bothered opposing his neutralist views because, as the paymasters of the Lao army, they could ignore him and conduct the war as they saw fit. The North Vietnamese on the other hand didnt really consider Laos an independent country. They considered it an underdeveloped region of their empire that needed their guidance. As in Cambodia, as long as neutralism meant the departure of the Americans and left the North Vietnamese army in the territories it controlled, they favoured it.In 1968 the North Vietnamese army pushed the Patht Lao forces aside and took over the fighting of the war. In January North Vietnam sent its 316th Division forward toward the Nambac Valley, where seven of the governments best military units were located. The valley was surrounded and pounded with artillery until the base eventually fell. The battle effectively ended the role of the Royal Lao Army for the next several years. While the Patht Lao were an ineffective force, the North Vietnamese army with its Soviet-provided field artillery and tanks was beyond anything that the Lao Army could deal with. The government disbanded all its forces greater than the size of a battalion and disengaged from the conflict.Between 1968 and 1973 Laos effectively ceased to exist as an independent state. It became a battlefield in the war between the United States and North Vietnam. The Hmong militias and Army forces, on one side, and the Vietnamese Army with the assistance of the Patht Lao, on the other, were engaged as auxiliary fighters. The country was divided into two zones: one - comprising about two-thirds of Laos but containing only about a quarter of its population - effectively controlled by North Vietnam, and the other - consisting of little more than the Mekong Valley but containing most of the Lao population - effectively controlled by the U.S. The Patht Lao, for reasons discussed earlier, were willing collaborators in the Vietnamese control of their zone of operations. They knew that the only way they could hope to take power in Laos was via the power of the North Vietnamese. While it is often said that Laos was a vital supply route for North Vietnam, the reality was not quite so tidy. Portions of Southern Laos were useful to North Vietnam, but North Vietnam occupied large sections of the country that had nothing to do with supply routes.The U.S. objective in Laos was to push government control as far eastward as practical. It sought to prevent the North Vietnamese and Patht Lao forces holding the Plain of Jars. After 1968, the US accomplished this mainly through Vang Paos Hmong militia. The other U.S. objectives were intelligence gathering and interruption of North Vietnams use of the Ho Chi Minh trail, and for this it relied on air power. During this period Laos was bombed more heavily than any other country ever has been in history: virtually every town and village in the Patht Lao zone was destroyed and most of the population made refugees. The North Vietnamese objectives were more complicated. Their primary goal was to keep the Ho Chi Minh trail in the south open, and to prevent the U.S. using Laos as a base for raids into North Vietnam. The war degenerated into the two sides pushing each other into or out of the Plain of Jars. In 1969 Nixon became President of the U.S. and began the long process of winding down the Vietnam War and finding a political settlement. But this brought no immediate respite in Laos. The new administration pursued the same goals by the same means, and in fact during 1969 and 1970 the bombing campaign increased in intensity. The extension of the war to Cambodia in 1970, which closed North Vietnams supply routes through that country, made the Ho Chi Minh trail even more crucial to the course of the Vietnam War. In the spring of 1969 the North Vietnamese attempted to hold the Plain of Jars through the rainy season. This led to a coordinated campaign that lead to a disastrous defeat of the North Vietnamese. Under constant pressure, their resistance collapsed in the Plain of Jars. They abandoned millions of dollars worth of military equipment and were chased almost to the North Vietnamese border. The success however was short-lived. The North Vietnamese launched a two-division counteroffensive led by a large tank force. All the gains of that year were lost back to the North Vietnamese.In March 1970 the Cambodian government of Nol ended the policy of ignoring the Vietnamese presence in the country. The port of Sihanoukville in Cambodia, which had effectively been a North Vietnamese Army supply terminal for years, was closed by the government. This action had the effect of making the supply routes from North Vietnam through Laos even more important to the North Vietnamese. In the spring of 1970 the North Vietnamese Army began advancing westward deeper into Laos than ever before. During the same year, units of the Thai Army entered the conflict. These so-called Unity Battalions were in theory volunteers, but were effectively Thai regulars.In 1971 the Royal Lao Army came back into the conflict. The North Vietnamese advance deep into the country destroyed the status quo and prompted the Army back into action. In July the Thai and irregular forces attempted a repeat of the successful 1969 offensive into the Plain of Jars. But the North Vietnamese had learned from their previous mistakes and withdrew in good order ahead of the offensive. While much territory was captured, no serious damage was done to the North Vietnamese Army. The Thai and irregular forces built a chain of fortifications down the middle of the Plain of Jars. In 1971 the U.S. sponsored an invasion of southern Laos by the South Vietnamese army, with the aim of severing the trail and shoring up the South Vietnamese government as the U.S. withdrew its combat troops. The invasion was bitterly resisted by North Vietnamese and was decisively defeated. The North Vietnamese also retaliated by capturing several provincial capitals which it had previously surrounded but not tried to take.An estimated 200,000 people were killed in Laos in the course of the war, most of them Lao civilians. While the ethnic minorities who mainly populated the mountains of the Patht Lao suffered terribly as a result of the U.S. air war, the majority of the Lao-Lum people in the Mekong Valley towns were little effected in a military sense. The influx of U.S. personnel and money (an estimated $US500 million in U.S. aid alone) produced an economic boom in the towns as service industries grew to meet the demands of the war and the large resident American civilian population. Lao generals and politicians, led by Phm Nsavan until his fall from power in 1965, grew rich on corruption, drug dealing, prostitution and smuggling, and large numbers of ordinary Lao moved into the cash economy for the first time, particularly in Viang Chan, which grew rapidly. The war also exposed the Lao to the full force of western popular culture for the first time, with an effect that both the Patht Lao and conservative Buddhists regarded as deeply corrupting of Lao tradition and culture. During these years the Patht Lao sought to project an image of moderation both domestically and internationally. Suphnuvong, as head of the Lao Patriotic Front, was the public face of the Patht Lao, while the Communist Party and its leader Kaisn remained in the background. At its 1968 congress, the Front issued a 12-point program which made no mention of socialism, but called for a Government of National Union and free elections, and promised respect for Buddhism and the monarchy. The fact that Suphnuvong was a royal prince as well as a communist seemed to many Lao a reassurance that the Patht Lao in power would pursue a moderate path. In the Patht Lao zone, the communists followed conspicuously moderate policies, although there were some attempts at collectivising agriculture where this was possible. The Patht Lao were effective providers of basic services, despite the difficulties created by the endless bombing, and also effective at mobilising the upland minorities, whom they treated with far greater respect than any Lao government had ever done. Most notably, the Patht Lao were free from corruption. On the negative side, as most Lao knew, their policies were largely driven by the North Vietnamese. In January 1973, following Nixons re-election, a peace agreement was announced between North Vietnam and the U.S. Following the pattern which had been established in Geneva in 1954, a peace settlement in Laos was agreed on as a side issue to the Vietnam question. The two sides in Laos had been in informal discussions since the previous July, and once their respective patrons had consented, they quickly signed a ceasefire and announced an Agreement on the Restoration of Peace and National Reconciliation. The main provisions were the formation of a Third Coalition government, with Suvannaphm as prime minister and 12 ministers from each side. The National Assembly, which had long lost its political legitimacy, was to be replaced by a Consultative Council of 42 members - 16 from each side plus ten agreed nominees. This body, to be chaired by Suphnuvong, was given equal status with the government, making Suphnuvong in effect co-ruler of the country. There was no mention of the Patht Lao giving up de facto control of its zone. Its armed forces were to be integrated into the national army in theory, but the timetable was never really certain. While the agreement required the North Vietnamese Army to leave Laos, the Vietnamese never left. The arrangements reflected the vastly strengthened position of the Patht Lao since the Second Coalition government. In recognition of this, the rightists attempted a last-gasp coup in Viang Chan in August, but it quickly collapsed, since by then many Lao recognised that it was only a matter of time before the Patht Lao took power.During 1974 and 1975 the balance of power in Laos shifted steadily in favour of the Patht Lao as the U.S. disengaged itself from Indochina. Suvannaphm was tired and demoralised, and following a heart attack in mid 1974 he spent some months recuperating in France, after which he announced that he would retire from politics following the elections scheduled for early 1976. The anti-communist forces were thus leaderless, and also divided and deeply mired in corruption. Suphnuvong, by contrast, was confident and a master political tactician, and had behind him the disciplined cadres of the communist party and the Patht Lao forces and the North Vietnamese army. The end of American aid also meant the mass demobilization of most of the non-Patht Lao military forces in the country. The Patht Lao on the other hand continued to be both funded and equipped by North Vietnam. In May 1974 Suphnuvong put forward an 18-point plan for National Reconstruction, which was unanimously adopted - a sign of his increasing dominance. The plan was mostly uncontroversial, with renewed promises of free elections, democratic rights and respect for religion, as well as constructive economic policies. But press censorship was introduced in the name of national unity, making it more difficult for non-communist forces to organise politically in response to the creeping Patht Lao takeover. In January 1975 all public meetings and demonstrations were banned. Recognising the trend of events, influential business and political figures began to move their assets, and in some cases themselves, to Thailand, France or the U.S.In 1975, the Patht Lao forces on the Plain of Jars supported by North Vietnamese heavy artillery and other units began advancing westward. In late April, the Patht Lao took the government outpost at Sala Phou Khoum crossroads which opened up Route 13 to a Patht Lao advance toward Muang Kassy. For the non-Patht Lao elements in the government, compromise seemed better than allowing what had happened in Cambodia and South Vietnam to happen in Laos. A surrender was thought to be better than a change of power by force.Communist Laosthumb|350px|The Lao National Culture Hall in Viang Chan, a gift from the Peoples Republic of ChinaIn March 1975, confident that the U.S. no longer had the stomach to intervene militarily in Indochina, the North Vietnamese began their final military offensive in South Vietnam, which by the end of April carried them to victory with the of Saigon. A few days earlier the Rouge army had entered Penh. The Patht Lao now knew that victory was within reach, and with the Vietnam war over the North Vietnamese authorised the seizure of power in Laos. Demonstrations broke out in Viang Chan, denouncing the rightists and demanding political change. Rightist ministers resigned from the government and fled the country, followed by senior Royal Lao Army commanders. A Patht Lao minister took over the defence portfolio, removing any chance of the Army resisting the Patht Lao takeover. Suvannaphm, dreading further conflict and apparently trusting Suphnuvongs promises of a moderate policy, gave instructions that the Patht Lao were not to be resisted, and the U.S. began to withdraw its diplomatic personnel. The Patht Lao army entered the major towns of southern Laos during May, and in early June occupied Luang Phrabng. Panic broke out in Viang Chan as most of the business class and many officials, officers and others who had collaborated with the U.S. scrambled to get their families and property across the Mekong to Thailand. Recognising that the cause was lost, Vang Pao led thousands of his Hmong fighters and their families into exile - eventually about a third of all the Lao Hmong left the country. Patht Lao forces entered an almost deserted Viang Chan in August.For a few months the Patht Lao appeared to honour their promises of moderation. The shell of the coalition government was preserved, there were no arrests or show-trials, and private property was respected. Diplomatic relations with the U.S. were maintained, despite an immediate cut-off of all U.S. aid. (Other western countries continued to offer aid, and Soviet and eastern European technicians began to arrive to replace the departed Americans.) But in December there was a sharp change in policy. A joint meeting of the government and the Consultative Council was held, at which Suphnuvong demanded immediate change. There was no resistance. On 2 December the King agreed to abdicate, and Suvannaphm resigned. The Lao Peoples Democratic Republic was proclaimed, with Suphnuvong as President. Phomvihn emerged from the shadows to become Prime Minister and the real ruler of the country. No more was heard of elections or political freedoms: non-communist newspapers were closed, and a large-scale purge of the civil service, army and police was launched. Thousands were dispatched for re-education in remote parts of the country, where many died and many more were kept for up to ten years. This prompted a renewed flight from the country. Many of the professional and intellectual class, who had initially been willing to work for the new regime, changed their minds and left - a much easier thing to do from Laos than from either Vietnam or Cambodia. By 1977 10 percent of the population had left the country, including most of the business and educated classes.The leadership group of the Peoples Revolutionary Party had hardly changed since the partys foundation, and did not change significantly during its first decade in power. Real power in the party rested with four men: General Secretary Kaisn, his trusted deputy and economics chief Nuhak Phumsavan (both from humble origins in Savannakhet), planning minister Sl Vongkhamxao (who died in 1991) and the Army commander and security chief Khamtai Siphandn. The partys French-educated intellectuals - President Souphanavong and education and propaganda minister Phumi Vongvichit - were more widely seen in public and were Politburo members, but not part of the inner group. All these leaders were Lao-Lum: while the ethnic minorities had provided most of the troops for the Patht Lao army, their leaders were confined to symbolic roles in front organisations rather than admitted to the inner core of party leadership. In 1975 the party had only 30,000 members in a country of 3.5 million people. Of these, a substantial number were members of ethnic minorities from the former Patht Lao zone, who had joined the party for pragmatic or patriotic reasons rather than through a real understanding of communism. The number of committed communists among the Lao-Lum majority of the Lao population was very small.The public policy of the party was to advance, step by step, to socialism, without going through the stage of capitalist development. This objective, a deviation from orthodox Marxism-Leninism borrowed (without acknowledgement) from Zedong, made a virtue of necessity: there was no chance of Laos having a stage of capitalist development while 90 percent of its population were subsistence farmers, and no chance of an orthodox Marxist path to socialism via a working class revolution in a country which had no industrial working class. But the party leaders, having fought for 30 years to achieve power, now had to confront the question of what socialism meant in a country such as Laos, and how it was to be achieved in circumstances of poverty and isolation, when most administrative and professional personnel had fled the country. Out of public sight, the policy of the party was generally determined by Vietnam. The policies of Vietnam led to the economic isolation of Laos from all its neighbors which in turn led to its total dependence on Vietnam. Vietnam treated Laos much like the Soviet Union treated countries in Eastern Europe.For Kaisn the path to socialism lay in emulating first the Vietnamese and then the Soviet models. Socialist relations of production must be introduced, and this, in an agricultural country, meant primarily the collectivisation of agriculture. All land was declared to be state property, and individual farms were merged into large-scale co-operatives. The means of production - which in Laos meant buffalo and wooden ploughs - were to be owned collectively. By the end of 1978 most of the lowland Lao rice-growers had been subjected to collectivisation. The program was deeply unpopular. The Patht Lao had never had much active support in these areas, and the peasants felt no sense of gratitude to the communists for having freed them from oppressive landlords, since there had been none in Laos.      As in every country where collectivisation has been attempted, the peasants engaged in passive resistance, including the slaughter of livestock, and many emigrated to Thailand. The impossibility of controlling the long Lao-Thai border meant that farmers could easily sell their crops on the free market in Thailand. As a result state food procurements fell sharply, and this, coupled with the cutoff of American aid, postwar cutback of Vietnamese/Soviet aid and the virtual disappearance of imported goods, produced shortages, unemployment and economic hardship in the towns. Matters were made worse in 1979 when the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia, and subsequent War, resulted in the Lao government being ordered by Vietnam to break off relations with China, ending another source of foreign assistance and trade. The deteriorating economic situation soon led to active resistance to the communist regime. Incidents of sabotage escalated, particularly in the south, and a shadowy Lao National Revolutionary Front began guerilla operations from bases in Thailand, just as the communists themselves had done in the 1940s. In 1976 the army seized power again in Thailand, and the anti-communist military regime closed off all exports to Laos, making economic conditions even worse, and actively supported the Lao opposition: shortly afterwards a plot to assassinate Kaisn, engineered by exiles with Thai support, was exposed. As well as economic grievances, the resistance was fuelled by resentment in urban areas over the governments restrictions on freedom of movement, tight censorship and curtailment of decadent western cultural activities such as cinema and nightclubs. the country was being gradually turned into an uncultured illiterate peasant society ruled by military force. The exodus of educated people to Thailand led to a partial collapse of the education system, leaving large numbers of idle young people as a ready source of discontent. The Vietnamese, Soviet and eastern European technicians and advisors had little interest in developing the country other than as a source of resources to be extracted, and infrastructure and plants soon deteriorated. Lack of money and skilled personnel, plus an anti-Chinese political line directed by Vietnam, plus the Thai trade embargo, caused interruptions to vital services such as electricity. Ruptured relations with China and Thailand made Laos totally dependent on Vietnam. In 1977 a 25-year treaty of friendship was signed, providing for large numbers of Vietnamese advisors and for 30,000 Vietnamese troops to stay in the country. The Vietnamese were as unpopular as ever with the majority of the Lao people, despite a barrage of propaganda designed to encourage solidarity between the two countries, and the belief that the communists were allowing the Vietnamese to take over Laos fueled opposition. During 1978 and 1979 the government became increasingly alarmed about the security situation. Both China and Thailand were supporting insurgencies in different parts of the country, and the resistance of the Hmong in central Laos revived with covert assistance from the exiled Hmong leaders in Thailand and the U.S. One government reaction was to arrest the elderly King, his Queen and the Crown Prince, and deport them to a remote location near the Vietnamese border, where they died of neglect and lack of medical attention. For many years the fate of the Lao royal family remained unknown, but in the 1990s the truth leaked out and caused wide resentment in Laos.In mid 1979 the government, apparently at the urging of Soviet advisors who feared that the communist regime was on the point of collapse, announced a sudden reversal of policy. Kaisn, a lifelong communist, showed himself to be a more flexible leader than many had expected. In a major speech in December, he admitted that Laos was not ready for socialism. This policy cannot be successfully implemented in the economic field, and it is suicidal because any party which tries to implement such a policy will only meet with bankruptcy. Citing Lenins Economic Policy of the 1920s, he conceded that capitalist relations of production would have to be restored if the economic decline of the country was not to continue and be exploited by enemies of the regime. Kaisns model was not Lenin, however, but Chinas Xiaoping, who at this time was starting the free-market reforms that laid the foundation for Chinas subsequent economic growth. Collectivisation was abandoned, and farmers were told that they were free to leave the co-operative farms, which virtually all of them promptly did, and to sell their surplus grain on the free market. Other liberalisations followed. Restrictions on internal movement were lifted, and cultural policy relaxed. As in China, however, there was no relaxation of the partys grip on political power.In 1990, deputy minister of science and technology Saysangkhi resigned from the Government and Party, calling for political and economic reform. He was arrested and died in captivity in 1998.()Relations with VietnamRelations with Vietnam had secretly set the strategy for the LPRP during the struggle to achieve full power, and the sudden opportunity to establish the LPDR in 1975 left no leeway to consider foreign policy alignments other than a continuation of the special relations with Vietnam. The relationship cultivated in the revolutionary stage predisposed Laos to Indochinese solidarity in the reconstruction and socialist construction phases and all but ensured that relations or alignments with China and Thailand would be wary and potentially unfriendly. Further, the LPRP, unlike the Cambodian communists under Pol Pot, was far too accustomed to accepting Vietnamese advice to consider striking out on its own. The final seizure of power by the hitherto secret LPRP in 1975 brought both a public acknowledgment of the previously hidden North Vietnamese guidance of the party and genuine expressions of gratitude by the LPRP to its Vietnamese partners. The challenge facing the ruling groupthe construction of a socialist societywas seen as a natural extension of past collaboration with North Vietnam. The revolution was simply entering a new phase in 1975, and the LPRP leaders congratulated themselves upon ousting the imperialists and looked forward to advice and economic as well as military support, which was not available from any neighbor or counterrevolutionary state. LPRP leaders were accustomed to discussing policies as well as studying doctrine in Hanoi. They formalized governmental contacts with their mentors at biannual meetings of the foreign ministers of Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam starting in 1980 and through the joint Cooperative Commission, which met annually to review progress of various projects. Other levels of cooperation between Laos and Vietnam existed, for example, party-to-party meetings and province-to-province exchanges, as well as mass organizations for youths and women. Meetings of the commission were held regularly. The primary channels for Vietnams influence in Laos, however, were the LPRP and the LPA. In the LPRP, long-standing collaboration and consultation at the very top made special committees unnecessary, whereas in the LPA, the Vietnamese advisers, instructors, and troops on station constituted a pervasive, inescapable influence, even though they scrupulously avoided public exposure by sticking to their designated base areas. Cooperation in the military field was probably the most extensive, with logistics, training, and communications largely supplied by Vietnam throughout the 1970s and 1980s (heavy ordnance and aircraft were provided by the Soviet Union). The phrase special relations came into general use by both parties after 1976, and in July 1977, the signing of the twentyfive -year Lao-Vietnamese Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation legitimized the stationing of Vietnamese army troops in Laos for its protection against hostile or counterrevolutionary neighbors. Another element of cooperation involved hundreds of Vietnamese advisers who mentored their Laotian counterparts in virtually all the ministries in Vientiane. Hundreds of LPRP stalwarts and technicians studied in institutes of Marxism-Leninism or technical schools in Hanoi. The resources that Vietnam was able to bestow upon its revolutionary partner, however, were severely limited by the physical destruction of war and the deadening orthodoxy of its economic structures and policies. However, it could put in a good word for its Laotian apprentices with the Soviet Union, which in turn could recommend economic assistance projects to its East European satellite states. Yet, Vietnams influence on Laos was determined by economic assistance and ideology as well as by geographical and historical proximity. The two nations fit together, as the leaders liked to say, like lips and teeth. Vietnam provided landlocked Laos a route to the sea, and the mountainous region of eastern Laos provided Vietnam a forward strategic position for challenging Thai hegemony in the Valley. During the 1980s, Vietnams regional opponents attributed to it a neocolonial ambition to create an Indochina Federation. This phrase can be found in early pronouncements of the ICP in its struggle against the French colonial structures in Indochina. The charge, exaggerated as it was, lost its currency once Vietnam withdrew its troops from Cambodia in 1989 and subsequently from Laos. Laoss dependence on Vietnam since 1975 could then be perceived as a natural extension of their collaboration and solidarity in revolution rather than as domination by Vietnam. With the departure of Vietnamese military forcesexcept for some construction engineersand the passing of most senior Vietnamese revolutionary partners, the magnetism of the special relationship lost its grip. Further, Vietnam was never able to muster large-scale economic aid programs. It launched only 200 assistance projects between 1975 and 1985, whereas the Union generated considerably more in the way of contributions. In 1992 the long-standing Vietnamese ambassador to Laos, a veteran of fourteen years service, characterized the relationship as composed damiti et de coopration multiforme entre les pays (of friendship and diverse cooperation between the two countries). This pronouncement was far less compelling than the objective law of existence and development formulation sometimes expressed in the past. Although Vietnams historical record of leadership in the revolution and its military power and proximity will not cease to exist, Laos struck out ahead of Vietnam with its New Economic Mechanism to introduce market mechanisms into its economy. In so doing, Laos has opened the door to rapprochement with Thailand and Russia at some expense to its special dependence on Vietnam. Laos might have reached the same point of normalization in following Vietnams economic and diplomatic change, but by moving ahead resolutely and responding to Thai and Russian gestures, Laos has broadened its range of donors, trading partners, and investors independent of Vietnams attempts to accomplish the same goal. Thus, Vietnam remains in the shadows as a mentor and emergency ally, and the tutelage of Laos has shifted dramatically to development banks and international entrepreneurs.Contemporary LaosImage:Viangchanbank.JPG|thumb|350px|A modern bank building in Viang Chan draped with the Lao national flag and the and sickle emblem of communism.The abandonment of collectivisation and the relaxation of discipline brought with them new problems, which grew worse the longer the communist party enjoyed a monopoly of power. These included increasing corruption and nepotism (a traditional feature of Lao political life), as ideological commitment faded and self-interest arose to replace it as the major motivation for seeking and holding office. The economic benefits of economic liberalisation were also slow to emerge. Unlike China, Laos did not have the potential for rapid economic growth through the restoration of a free market in agriculture and the fostering of export-driven low-wage manufacturing. This was partly because Laos was a small, poor, landlocked country while China was a geographic and demographic giant, but also because the Lao farmers, most living at little more than subsistence level, could not generate the huge surpluses, even given economic incentives, that the Chinese peasants could and did after Dengs decollectivisation of agriculture. In 1985, on the tenth anniversary of the communist takeover, the regime claimed that domestic product had doubled under its rule. This was misleading because the economy had been in a virtual collapse in 1975, making it an unrealistic basis for comparison. A United Nations report estimated that GDP had scarcely changed since 1980, although it had begun to rise in 1984. In any case the country remained very poor, with little industrial development.The first decade of communist rule did produce some advances in health, education and social development, particularly for the ethnic minority peoples, who were the main beneficiaries of the restoration of peace and the reunification of the country. But in these fields the government was hampered by an acute shortage of trained personnel, resulting from the massive exodus of the educated classes between 1975 and 1978, and also from the loss of American assistance. Cut off from educational opportunities in the west, many young Lao were dispatched for higher education in Vietnam, the Soviet Union or eastern Europe, but even crash education courses took time to produce trained teachers, engineers and doctors. In any case, the standard of training in some cases was not high, and many of the Lao students lacked the language skills to understand what they were being taught. Today many of these Lao regard themselves as a lost generation and have had to gain new qualifications at western standards to be able to find employment.In 1985, recognising the disappointing results of the partys first decade in power, Kaisn introduced the New Economic Mechanism. Although justified with appropriate socialist phraseology, this policy amounted in effect to abandoning state ownership and control of the economy. The state bureaucracy was reduced in size and its role in economic management reduced, subsidies to state industries were abolished, managers were told that they should aim to make their enterprises profitable (which inevitably meant shedding employees), and retail prices were deregulated. While long-term benefits were expected from these reforms, in the short term they produced inflation, unemployment among workers from the loss-making state sector, and served mainly to increase resentment and insecurity among the urban population. The reforms thus did little to bolster the standing of the communist regime, particularly since its concessions to capitalism had cost it much of its ideological legitimacy. Fortunately for the party, the opposition forces were too weak and disorganised to take advantage of the partys vulnerable position.The international position of Laos also remained precarious. Deference to Vietnam had resulted in the political and economic isolation of Laos. Its other borders with China and Thailand were hostile and closed. The policies of the government had left it dependent on Vietnam as its only ally and source of assistance. By the mid 1980s, however, relations with China had begun to thaw as Chinese anger at Lao support for Vietnam in 1979 faded and Vietnamese power within Laos diminished. By 1986 official ties had been restored, although relations remained cool. Ambassadors were exchanged in 1988, the same year the Vietnam officially withdrew its troops from both Laos and Cambodia (in fact some troops remained in Laos). At the same time, Laos made the first steps to repairing relations with the U.S., co-operating with U.S. efforts to find the remains of American air-crew shot down over Laos during the Indochina war. This restoration of ties was seen as necessary both to enable American aid and investment to resume, and to end covert U.S. support for the low-level anti-communist insurgency which continued to flicker in the south. The government also hoped that the U.S. would use its influence to urge Thailand to ease its economic and political pressure on Laos. In 1984 and again in 1987 there were border clashes between Thai and Lao forces in a disputed territory in Xainyabur province, and Thai restrictions on trade continued to hurt Laos.The collapse of communism in eastern Europe which began in 1989 and ended with the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 came a profound shock to the Lao communist leaders. Ideologically, it did not suggest to the Lao leaders that there was anything fundamentally wrong with socialism as an idea, but it confirmed for them the wisdom of the concessions in economic policy they had made since 1979. More practically, the Soviet Union had been the largest contributor of foreign aid to Laos, but in 1989 Gorbachev told Kaisn that aid would have to be sharply reduced. In fact aid was cut off completely in 1990, creating a renewed economic crisis. Laos was forced to ask France and Japan for emergency assistance, and also to ask the Bank and the Development Bank for aid. This had further consequences. The international agencies required further economic liberalisation and reform as a precondition for large-scale aid. Laos was also forced to mend its fences with the non-communist countries if it wanted their assistance. Laos was helped in this by the restoration of civilian government in Thailand after 1992, which ended the confrontationist policies of the previous military regimes. Finally, in 1989, Kaisn visited Beijing to confirm the restoration of friendly relations, and to secure Chinese aid.In the 1990s the old guard of Lao communism passed from the scene. Suphnuvong retired in 1991 and died in 1995. He was succeeded as President by Kaisn, while Khamtai Siphandn became Prime Minister, but Kaisn in turn died in November 1992, and was succeeded as President by Nuhak Phumsavan and as party leader by Khamtai, who thus emerged as the effective ruler of the country. In 1998 Nuhak retired and Khamtai succeeded him as President, a post he continued to hold until 2006, at 81 the last of the generation of leaders who waged the thirty-year struggle for power. General Keobounphanh became Prime Minister in 1998, and was succeeded in 2001 by Vorachith. Since the 1990s the dominant factor in the Lao economy has been the spectacular growth in the South-East Asian region, and particularly in Thailand. In 1994 an Australian-funded bridge was opened linking Viang Chan with the Thai city of Khai: this has become the countrys most important piece of infrastructure, because it has linked Laos to the booming Thai economy. (Since then another bridge has been built linking Ratchathani in eastern Thailand with the southern Lao town of Pkx. A third bridge at Savannakht is expected to open in 2006.) To take advantage of this, the Lao government lifted virtually all restrictions on foreign trade and investment, allowing Thai and other foreign firms to set up and trade freely in the country. Lao and Chinese exiles were also encouraged to return to Laos, and to bring their money with them. Many did so - today a member of the former Lao royal family, Princess Manilai, owns a hotel and health resort in Luang Phrabng, while some of the old Lao elite families, such as the Inthavongs, again operate (if not live) in the country.Of equal benefit to Laos was the rapid expansion of tourism in South-East Asia, in which again Thailand was a leading participant. The Lao government saw the possibilities of income from tourism in the 1990s, but the almost total lack of tourist infrastructure, the poor transport system, the non-convertibility of the Lao currency and fears by some communist officials of political dangers and cultural pollution from an influx of foreigners all acted as barriers. The American writer Dakin, who worked as an adviser to the Lao National Tourism Authority, has written an amusing account of the struggles of the Lao bureaucracy to adapt to the demands of the tourism industry. Among his projects was Visit Laos Year in 1999-2000, which began the current boom in tourism to Laos. Today Laos is a popular tourist destination, with the cultural and religious glories of Luang Phrabng (now a UNESCO Heritage Site) being particularly popular. A host of small businesses have grown up to serve the tourist trade, providing welcome employment to thousands of people, while foreign (mainly Thai) airlines, bus companies and hotels have moved in to fill the infrastructure gaps that the Lao government lacks the funds or expertise to provide.Since the reforms of the 1980s, Laos has achieved sustained growth, averaging six percent a year since 1988, except during the financial crisis of 1997. But subsistence agriculture still accounts for half of GDP and provides 80 percent of total employment. Much of the private sector is controlled by Thai and Chinese companies, and indeed Laos has to some extent become an economic and cultural colony of Thailand, a source of some resentment among Lao. Laos is still heavily dependent on foreign aid, but Thailands ongoing expansion has increased demand for timber and hydroelectricity, Laoss only major export commodities. Recently Laos has normalised its trade relations with the U.S., but this has yet to produce any major benefits. The Union has provided funds to enable Laos to meet membership requirements for the Trade Organisation. A major hurdle is the kip, which is still not an officially convertible currency.  The communist party retains a monopoly of political power, but leaves the operation of the economy to market forces, and does not interfere in the daily lives of the Lao people provided they do not challenge its rule. Attempts to police the religious, cultural, economic and sexual activities of the people have been largely abandoned, although Christian evangelism is officially discouraged. The media is state controlled, but most Lao have free access to Thai radio and television (Thai and Lao are mutually comprehensible languages), which gives them news from the outside world. Modestly censored Internet access is available in most towns. Lao are also fairly free to travel to Thailand, and indeed illegal Lao immigration to Thailand is a problem for the Thai government. Those who challenge the communist regime, however, receive harsh treatment. International has continued to document illegal detention and torture of political detainees. Various opposition groups operate in Thailand and the U.S., but there seems little evidence of active opposition inside Laos. For the time being most Lao seem content with the personal freedom and modest prosperity they have enjoyed over the past decade.In March 2006 Khamtai stood down as Party leader and President, and was succeeded in both posts by Sayasone, aged a relatively youthful 70. Like Khamtai, Choummaly had a military background, and was generally seen as unlikely to initiate major reforms.See also*Vietnamese invasion of Laos*Rebellion (1826-1828)ReferencesSources*Martin Stuart-Fox, A History of Laos, Cambridge University Press 1997*Kenneth Conboy, War in Laos 1954-1975, Squadron/Signal publications 1994du Laosdel Laosdo Laos
3994400
Mars_in_the_fiction_of_Leigh_Brackett
240px|right|The planet MarsThe planet Mars appears frequently as a setting for many of the stories of Brackett, and Mars and Martians are frequently mentioned in other stories of the Brackett Solar System.  Bracketts Mars shares some characteristics with the astronomical Mars, but in other respects functions as a consistent fantasy world with recurring landmarks and characteristics that reappear from story to story.   Some of these fantasy characteristics are of Bracketts own invention; others reflect some of the scientific theories about Mars that were current before the early 1960s, although certain of the astronomical and scientific details described in this article are not true of the real planet Mars.Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun in our solar system.  In Bracketts Solar System, Mars has two moons, Denderon (Phobos) and Vashna (Deimos).  Mars is one of the three Triangle Worlds and a founding member of both the League of Worlds and the United Worlds.   It is the site of the headquarters of the Interworld Space Authority.Physical characteristicsMars has only a quarter the surface area of the Earth and only one-tenth the mass, though its surface area is approximately equal to that of the Earths dry land because Mars no longer possesses oceans. The day on Mars is very close to Earths day: 24 hours, 39 minutes, and 35.244 seconds.AtmosphereThe atmosphere of Mars is thinner than that of Earth or Venus, comparable to the high plateaus of the Andes or Himalayas on earth, but is oxygen-rich and presents few difficulties to offworlders after a period of acclimatization.thumb|left|Image of Mars showing northern Drylands (ochre) and southern dry ocean basins (dark).GeographyTopographyThe dichotomy of Martian topography is telescopically observable from a great distance: pale northern plains (or  drylands) covered with reddish sands contrast with the darker southern lowlands.  The north represents Mars ancient continents, while the equatorial and southern dark patches are the dry sea-beds of ancient oceans.CanalsThe disappearance of Mars ancient surface water has governed the history of Mars; there is too little water on Mars to support thick clusters of population or abundant life on the surface.  Martian civilization was only maintained in existence by the construction of numerous canals by means of a now-forgotten technology.  The canals act as aqueducts, carrying meltwater from the polar ice-caps to the temperate and equatorial regions of Mars.  In the southern hemisphere, the canals preserve the remnant waters of the ancient Martian seas, and serve to connect the remnants of Mars former harbor cities; these canals are collectively known as the Low Canals.For further information on the hypothetical linear structures believed by some astronomers to exist on Mars before 1964, see canals.thumb|right|Mars with polar ice caps visible.Political GeographyAlthough to the casual visitor to spaceports such as Kahora and Jekkara Port, Mars may seem little different from the modern urban life of Earth or Venus, beyond the big cities the life of Mars proceeds much as it has for thousands of years, based upon the ancient units of canal town and desert tribe.The Martian Planetary Government, unlike the World Government of Terra, is a federal government whose primary units are the Martian City-States, represented in the Council of City-States.  These States are largely self-governed and admit little interference in their internal affairs.  The states are mostly clustered in the moister lowlands of equatorial and southern Mars, although some (the Polar Cities) are grouped in the areas close to the northern polar ice cap. The following are only some of the more prominent City-States:*Karappa*Kathuun*Kushat (polar)*Narrissan*Ruh*Tarak*VarlLow-Canal CitiesThe Low-Canal cities, Barrakesh, Jekkara, and Valkis, are a group apart, in history and culture.BarrakeshJekkaraJekkara was formerly a port city and a prominent kingdom in ancient Mars.  It stood on the eastern shores of the White Sea, below a range of hills immediately to its east.  These hills were chosen by the ancient Quiru as the site of the tomb in which their errant compatriot, Rhiannon, was imprisoned.  Thousands of years later it came under the control of the Dhuvian-supported empire of Sark, before that kingdom suddenly collapsed.   This original city of Jekkara is no longer inhabited, and is known as the Old Town; its lighthouse and stone and marble quays are still visible above the old waterline.  As the White Sea retreated, during the 17th Dynasty of the Khalide kings (c. 16,000-14,000 ybp) Jekkaras position as a maritime power dwindled.  The Khalide palace atop the cliffs that formerly lined the sea-basin (now desert) still exists, though in ruin.The New Town is the still living part of Jekkara.  Its center is the great square that fronts the Jekkaran Low-canal which runs, roughly north-to-south, immediately to the west of the town, by the old bridge across the canal.  Jekkaras businesses are chiefly drinking, gambling, and other vices; for a long time, however, non-Martians were prohibited entry into the town, and travellers are still advised to be cautious in its back-blocks.Jekkara also retains some quaint but little-known customs, such as the propitiatory rites to the chthonic Dark Lord said to dwell in a cave in the hills above Jekkara.  These have been reported to involve human sacrifice, but experts currently believe it to be a harmless, vestigial ritual, whatever its origins may have been.Modern Jekkara is known for its pit mining, and its wealth has given it a modern spaceport (Jekkara Port), two miles from New Town.  The best known of Jekkaras many entertainment establishments is Madam Kans, boasting beautiful dancing girls, exquisitely prepared thil liquor or desert-cactus brandy, and gambling at getak. ValkisTravelling south along Jekkaras Low-canal brings you to the city of Valkis, at an intersection with another canal and the cliffs that formerly lined the sea bottom.  Valkis is even more archaic and conservative than Jekkara, and consequently more dangerous.Valkis stood on a gentler slope than Jekkaras cliffs, and in consequence one can see no fewer than five different Valkises, each built below the others as the sea retreated.  As in Jekkara, the highest city contains the ancient royal palace.The hills back of Valkis are home to Shunni nomads, who cooperate with the Valkisians on certain matters.Valkis was formerly the center of the addictive vice of shanga, the going-back, a technology inducing euphoria as part of a temporary evolutionary regression.  This practice was for a while very popular among Terrans, and brought a great deal of money, some of which was used to partially restore Valkis ruins.  It was found that in some cases the regression might be more than temporary, and could go well beyond merely primitive humanity.  After it was discovered that the Lady Fand of Valkis was abusing shanga to brutalize and degrade Earth humans, whose presence was resented, it was outlawed; however, in some disreputable quarters of Valkis a modified form of it has remained available (The Beast-Jewel of Mars, Queen of the Martian Catacombs).  Under a later lord, Delgaun, Valkis was the center of a plot to use the Dryland nomads of Kesh and Shun to attack the border City-States, to the profit of Valkis.  The failure of the plot, involving the death of both Delgaun and Kynon of Shun, destroyed Valkis chance to lead Mars (Queen of the Martian Catacombs).  Valkisian hostility to Terrans remained, and it was a center of the Pan-Martian faction.KahoraThe Trade City of Kahora is a Terran foundation, and now serves as the administrative capital for the Martian Planetary Government (MPG).  It thus does not count as a City-State, though it is one of the most populous and busy places on the planet.DrylandsThe stretches of uncultivated land between the canals and City-States belong to the Martian Dryland nomads, who are grouped into two large and frequently antagonistic tribes, the nations of Kesh and Shun.  There are a few other nomadic bands, such as the Norland tribe of Mekh, who do not belong to these two tribes.HistoryOceanic MarsThe present desiccated state of Mars is historically abnormal, and represents the outcome of a long period of drought beginning perhaps 20,000 years ago. Before that, Mars -- as testified to by numerous physical and historical evidences -- was an oceanic world similar to Earth.The earliest known inhabitants of Mars were the Quiru. Their exact date is unknown: conventional dates such as one million years ago are at best approximate and are probably exaggerated. The ancestry of the Quiru is unknown, though they seem to have been human in form.  They possessed a high technology of which little survives; but they remained in the memories of the Martians as a race of gods.  Prior to all recorded history they vanished from Mars. The only name of the Quiru that is remembered, however, is that of Rhiannon, a renegade who was punished for sharing the technology of the Quiru with other, less developed Martian races, most notably the reptilian Dhuvians.Thousands of years later, those same Dhuvians were able to create a short-lived empire around the White Sea of Mars, which included such later significant cities as Valkis and Barrakesh. They did this through manipulating the nearby human kingdom of Sark; their opponents were driven back to such refuges as Khondor, ruled by the Sea-kings. The Khonds and their allies, the halfling Swimmers and Sky Folk, were ultimately able to defeat Sark and liberate her vassal cities; the Dhuvian city of Caer Dhu was destroyed (Sea-kings of Mars).About the same time the city of Shandakor was flourishing. Shandakor was the home of another non-human race, and possessed an advanced technology similar, though not quite as advanced, as that of the Quiru, which they shared to a judicious extent with their human neighbors. Their self-imposed isolation from the humans, some of whom they used as slaves, earned them the enmity of other humans; and though the people of Shandakor lived to see the Terran presence on Mars, their city -- already depopulated and dilapidated -- tragically fell when the neighboring nomad tribes cut their water supply (The Last Days of Shandakor).The Thinkers, who lived in domed cities near the polar cap, were another non-human race of the time of the Sea-kings. They are thought to have withdrawn from the rest of Mars at about the time that humans became numerous, although they intervened from time to time in moments of crisis, such as the Inter-hemispheric War of 62,007 (n.b., the synchrony of this dating system with Earth reckonings is uncertain). This may have been the same war in which Sark was overthrown, although in other accounts of it the Thinkers are not mentioned (Shadow Over Mars).Another technologically advanced race were the human Prira Cen, who lived about 40,000 years ago. They were overthrown by a nomadic people of raiders whom they had helped civilize about 400 years earlier; these people founded the empire of the Seven Kingdoms, encompassing about half of the land surface of Mars, seated at Rhiannon, an island group in the Sea of Kesh, later known as the Lost Islands. It is uncertain if there is any connection between the islands of Rhiannon and Rhiannon of the Quiru (The Sorcerer of Rhiannon).A more malign influence on Martian history were the Ramas, or Immortals of the island city of Sinharat, who developed or inherited a technology that allowed minds to be exchanged between bodies; by placing their minds into younger bodies when they became old, they acquired a sort of immortality, at the cost of thousands of lives (Queen of the Martian Catacombs/The Secret of Sinharat).The causes of the long drought that desiccated Mars are not fully known; they may have had something to do with a temporary expansion of the ice cap that occurred about that time (Black Amazon of Mars).  The Ramas, attempting to preserve the civilization of nearby Kharif (from which they had stolen most of their bodies), provided resources and technologies which gave them access to desalinated water. For a while Kharif flourished, but as the overall desiccation of Mars could not be halted, the end result was to create a greater population to eventually die of thirst.  The remnant peoples of Kharif eventually adapted to living in a hostile, dry climate, and their descendants are the Dryland tribes of Kesh and Shun (The Road to Sinharat).The long-term remedy for the drying-up of Mars was found in the construction of the canal system, which brought water from the polar caps to the equator, and channeled what remained of the original sea water.  Access to the water of the northern polar cap, at this time greatly extended, was achieved by the Martian hero Ban Cruach. According to some legends he defeated a group of psychrophilic non-humans who had used artificial means to drain the planets heat, and made polar melt-water available for the canals (Black Amazon of Mars).The technology used to create the canal system has long since been lost, but the Martians who live by the canals regard keeping them clear as a traditional obligation (Mars Minus Bisha, The Road to Sinharat).The Coming of the TerransUntil the later 20th century, it was widely believed that Mars was a lifeless, barren desert; astronomers such as Schiaparelli and Lowell who claimed to have telescopically detected Martian life were generally disregarded.  It took direct contact with Mars and its civilized peoples to vindicate their observations.  Terran exploration of Mars rapidly followed the initial contacts, and the Trade City of Kahora was founded under the Umbrella Treaty with the Federation of Martian City-States in 1981 (Purple Priestess of the Mad Moon).Terran influence spread slowly from Kahora, starting with spaceship crews and less savory types, thieves and mercenaries who embroiled themselves in the last-gasp wars of the older civilizations. Later they were joined by others with scientific interests: physicians, anthropologists, archaeologists, trying to make sense of the history of Mars and of its peoples. Within a few centuries, however, Terrans could be seen all over Mars.Martian RebellionsThe Terran presence was strongly resented by the more tradition-minded Martians.  On three occasions in the early years after the coming of the Terrans, pan-Martian coalitions joining the Dryland tribes to the Low-canal towns attempted to beat back Terran culture and political dominance.The first rebellion was that of Kynon of Shun, who together with Delgaun of Valkis and a number of criminal leaders from across the System sought to make an attack on the Dryland Border States.  The rebellion fizzled when it became apparent that Kynon was in fact the tool of a conspiracy with quite different motives (Queen of the Martian Catacombs/Secret of Sinharat).The second rebellion was in opposition to a Terran-inspired scheme to replace Mars traditional canal technology with a new technology intended to water large areas of the Drylands.  The rebellion came to an end when the government abandoned the project (The Road to Sinharat).The third rebellion for the first time combined Martian traditionalists (pan-Martians) with Martian moderates and Terran transplants (Unionists), largely in response to the policies of Ed Fallons Terran Exploitations Company, a mineral-extraction venture based in the city-state of Ruh which was very powerful.  The rebellion was successful in terms of toppling the leadership of the T.E.C. and leading to a new Unionist planetary government under Hugh St. John; however, the traditionalist project of bringing to power the heir of an ancient line of Martian kings failed (Shadow Over Mars/The Nemesis from Terra).The Interplanetary WarsMars played a significant role in each of the three major interplanetary wars.  In each of them, its primary concern was protecting its access to offworld water.In the Earth-Venus war, Mars maintained neutrality, though it was careful to keep good relations with Venus as most of its water was obtained from that planet (No Mans Land in Space).  In the Jovian War, when the inhabitants of the satellites of Jupiter attacked the Triangle Worlds, Mars fought alongside Earth and Venus (Outpost on Io).Mars role in the Interplanetary War of the 26th century was less creditable.  Emerging from its own World War in 2504, Mars attempted to reclaim large areas of the Drylands for farming -- an operation that was extremely water-intensive.  To break Venus monopoly on shipping water to Mars, the Martians sought to obtain water-rich asteroids controlled by Jupiter.  With the outbreak of war between Venus and Jupiter, Mars sought to aggravate the war and improve its own position with regard to the warring parties by bombing Venus Trade City of Vhia under the guise of a Jovian attack.  Mars role in the bombing was, however, detected by representatives of Interplanetary Press (Interplanetary Reporter).Anthropology and EthnologyHuman MartiansThe majority of native Martians are humans, not of proximate Terran stock, but (despite differences in color and build) genetically compatible with Terran humans.  The historical nature of the connection remains uncertain, but the presumption is that at some point in the past an ancestral human stock had seeded many of the worlds of the Solar System (The Secret of Sinharat).Ancient RacesSome of the ancient human races of Mars have disappeared, leaving only memory and legend behind them, though rumors of their survival have occasionally surfaced.The Quiru were perhaps the earliest known group of human Martians, possessed of a technology and knowledge so advanced that they were regarded as gods.  The best known of the Quiru was Rhiannon, who taught some of the Quiru technology to the reptilians of Caer Dhu, and was therefore cast out and reviled as a diabolical figure (Sea-Kings of Mars/The Sword of Rhiannon).The Prira Cen were a wise and technologically advanced race, distinguished from the other humans of Mars by their golden eyes and blue hair.  They were destroyed 40,000 years ago by the Sorcerers of the Lost Islands of Rhiannon (The Sorcerer of Rhiannon).The Ramas were the rulers of the island city-state of Sinharat, who possessed a technology that allowed them to live on in the body of another person -- at the cost of that persons life (Queen of the Martian Catacombs/The Secret of Sinharat, The Road to Sinharat).Modern Races  Perhaps the best preserved, and certainly the most distinctive, of the ancient cultures on Mars is that of the Dryland barbarians, who are for the most part divided into the two tribes of Kesh and Shun.The Drylanders are adept at forcing a living out of the brutally extreme climate of the desert, dryer than the Sahara on earth.  They can survive desert crossings that would kill a Terran, or even a Martian of the City-States or Low-canals.The Keshi warriors wear their tawny hair long, braided up in a kind of crown by thin metal chains. Both Keshi men and women can become warriors.  Their dark brown faces are tanned to the appearance of hard wood or metal by the harsh sun, far away but barely filtered by the thin atmosphere.  Their eyes are amber-yellow or blue.  Their usual garment is a kilt ornamented with metal bosses.The Shunni wear bright kilts and leather harness.  Their weapons are barbed spears and knives.  Their skin is olive-brown and their hair olive-purple.  They live in hill-caves wherever there is an available water source.HalflingsMars has possessed an unusual number of very variable non-human or semi-human (halfling) species, intelligent but alien and genetically dissimilar to the humans (Martian or Terran).  Some of these are extinct, but others can be found in out-of-the-way corners of Mars.The Swimmers were an aquatic halfling race, gifted with telepathy, living in the ancient Martian seas.  They did not survive the drying up of the ocean beds and are now extinct (Sea-Kings of Mars/The Sword of Rhiannon).The Sky Folk were a winged halfling species living on islands in the sea.  Originally of fully human size, their descendants on present-day Mars have dwindled to only four feet tall, and are only found in such former island fortresses as Caer Hebra (Sea-Kings of Mars/The Sword of Rhiannon, Shadow over Mars/The Nemesis from Terra).The Dhuvians were a reptilian species that long possessed an advanced technological equipment even when the rest of Mars was limited to early Iron Age technology.  Their efforts to establish an empire over the other Martian races failed, and they vanished thousands of years ago -- though it is possible that some of the vaguely reptilian races, such as the people of Shandakor, might have some connection with them (Sea-Kings of Mars/The Sword of Rhiannon).The Thinkers were a humanoid species who lived in cities near the northern polar ice-cap.  They intervened from time to time in the affairs of Mars, notably during the era of the Sea-Kings, but eventually retreated to a realm of pure thought, leaving their useless bodies behind (Shadow over Mars/The Nemesis from Terra).The Anthropoids, or ape-men, are a sub-human, semi-intelligent race of apelike beings that roam the sea-bottoms of Mars.  Whether they are an offshoot from the same root as the human Martians, or a degenerate human sub-group is uncertain.  The Terran Exploitations Company employed them as trackers, kidnappers and killers (Shadow over Mars/The Nemesis from Terra).The People of Shandakor were a tall, golden-skinned humanoid species, with black eyes, a silver crest of wiry fibres on the scalp, similar silvery tufts on their pointed ears, and traces of scales, perhaps pointing to a reptilian ancestor. They restricted themselves to the single city of Shandakor, but their technological skills, to the degree that they agreed to share them, had a great influence on the rest of Martian civilization.  Shandakor in its heyday was a great trading center visited by halflings (Swimmers, Sky Folk, Dhuvians), but as the older civilizations vanished it became increasingly remote and detached from Martian affairs, lost in its own memories of the past. Relations with the Martian humans became distant and hostile. Shandakor finally fell when its water supply was cut by one of the neighboring Dryland tribes; none of the people of Shandakor survived (The Last Days of Shandakor).Martian LanguagesAlthough there are no doubt a wide variety of vernaculars spoken in the various City-States of Mars, all human Martian languages appear to be related, and two forms are widely used or recognized in all civilized areas of Mars.  These are generally known as High Martian and Low Martian.High Martian is an ancient language, which has been compared to Terran Sanskrit, though it is far older; the characters in which it is written have not changed for thousands of years.  It has been retained in use as a polite and formal means of expression. Low Martian, by contrast is the ordinary vernacular of the Low-canal towns, and can be widely understood throughout Mars.Martian ReligionArchaeologyGiven the Mars has, by some estimates, at least a million years of past history, archaeology is a very fruitful field.  Many of the earlier archaeologists were little more than tomb robbers, less interested in scientific research than in gaining a high price for their plunder.  Archaeology is now, however, carried on under the auspices of a number of Martian and Terran foundations, including the Martian Archeological Foundation, the Society for the Preservation of Martian Relics, and the Martian Antiquities department in Kahora.Researchers into Martian antiquities have discovered many lost cities belonging to earlier phases of Martian history, both human and alien.  These include:*Lhak*Ptakuth*Shandakor*Sinharat*Ruins near the Wells of TamboinaIn addition, productive work has been done in the vicinity of old sites that are still inhabited, like Jekkara.GovernmentSymbols of MarsBefore the formation of the Martian Planetary Government, the only symbols representing Mars as a whole were either archaic ones from ancient Mars, or found on standards of would-be pan-Martian rebellions.  The Banner of Death and Life borne in Kynon of Shuns rebellion was one such; modelled on the symbols of the ancient Ramas, it bore on a black field two white crowns above a red sword.  More general in its application was the Banner of the Twin Moons raised for the planned revolt on behalf of Haral of Karadoc.  It is probable that this was the inspiration for the current Martian planetary emblem of twin circles, representing the moons.The moons of MarsMars has two tiny natural moons, Denderon and Vashna, which orbit very close to the planet.  Terrans generally call them by the Latin names Phobos and Deimos.  Phobos, the larger, closer, and faster-moving of the two moons shows evidence of the presence of an unknown race in the distant past that has left monuments that are still little-known.  In Low-canal culture, Phobos is sometimes known as the Mad Moon and plays an important part in certain rituals (Purple Priestess of the Mad Moon).thumb|center|400px|Photograph of a Martian sunset See also *Brackett*Brackett Solar System*in fictionReferencesCore Mars stories*Martian Quest (Science Fiction February 1940)*The Treasure of Ptakuth (Astounding April 1940)*The Sorcerer of Rhiannon (novelette; Astounding February 1942)*Shadow Over Mars (Stories Fall 1944) published in book form as The Nemesis from Terra*The Beast-Jewel of Mars (novelette; Stories Winter 1948)*Quest of the Starhope (Wonder Stories April 1949)*Sea-Kings of Mars (Wonder Stories June 1949) published in book form as The Sword of Rhiannon*Queen of the Martian Catacombs (Stories Summer 1949) published in book form as Secret of Sinharat*Black Amazon of Mars (Stories March 1951) published in book form as of the Talisman*The Last Days of Shandakor (novelette; Stories April 1952)*Mars Minus Bisha (Stories January 1954)*The Road to Sinharat (novelette; Stories May 1963)*Purple Priestess of the Mad Moon (Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction October 1964)Marginal Mars stories*Water Pirate (Science Stories January 1941)*The Veil of Astellar (novelette; Wonder Stories Spring 1944)*The Ark of Mars (Stories September 1953) later published as part of the book Alpha Centauri or Die!Non-Mars stories*Interplanetary Reporter (Stories May 1941)*No Mans Land in Space (novelette; Stories July 1941)*Outpost on Io (Stories November/Winter 1942)*The Halfling (novelette; Stories February 1943)
4004012
Cylon_Raider
The Cylon Raider is the standard starfighter used by the Cylons, in the various Galactica movies and television series. Cylon raiders are used as the main line of defense for Cylon Basestars. Original series The Raider in the original series is an exceptionally powerful fighter/attack craft employed by the Cylon Empire and carries much more formidable armament than the weapons on Colonial Viper fighters (two directed energy weapons and provisions for internal bombs). A Cylon Raider carries a crew of three centurions (commander, pilot and co-pilot). The commander sits on a slightly elevated seat between the two pilots and issues orders. Raiders frequently make suicide attacks on enemy capital ships, typically attacking the fighter launch bays. Although a typical Basestar holds far more Raiders than a Battlestar has Vipers, this advantage is often negated by the human ability to improvise and adapt to changing combat situations. In the episode The Living Legend, Baltar commissioned a personal fighter to take part in a battle. It is used to transport him (not unlike Colonial shuttles).1980 SeriesA larger super raider was depicted in the sequel series 1980. Battlestar Galactica (2003, 20042009) In the 2003 reimagining of Battlestar Galactica, the Cylon Raider is the main attack fighter used by the Cylons, participating in the destruction of the Twelve Colonies and later actions.This fighter is very different from the previous, piloted Raider used during the Cylon War (the Raider from the 1978 series). The new Raiders are cybernetic in nature: the ship is actually a living creature. Just like the humanoid Cylons, the Raiders are also capable of being reborn into new Raiders after having been destroyed.()  This is done so that new, replacement Raiders do not have to be trained, meaning that experienced combat pilots that have been killed are quickly available for duty again. This provides the Cylons with a distinct tactical advantage in the amount of battle-seasoning a Raider will have over a replacement Viper pilot; in essence, every time a Raider is destroyed, it is reborn slightly improved having learned through each Death/Downloading/Rebirth life-cycle it undergoes.(). Raiders can also perform riskier, but more devastating attacks on the Colonials, including but not limited to, kamikaze-style attacks.The Raiders have many weapons, including conventional and nuclear missiles as well as kinetic energy weapons. They can transmit a virus to a Colonial vessel using the Command Navigation Program (CNP), rendering the Colonial vessel inoperable. When transmitting the virus, its red eye activates and oscillates to the left and right repeatedly.The Cylon Raider is also capable of making FTL jumps.  After a Heavy Raider was captured by the Battlestar Galactica, its FTL drive system was discovered to be more efficient than those on the Colonial vessels. It could travel the distance of Kobol to Caprica in less than 10 jumps (compared to the estimated 120 jumps the Colonial fleet would take)It is capable of atmospheric flight, as was its predecessor, and is far more maneuverable in spaceflight than the previous Raider, likely due to upgraded thrust-vectoring systems. It is likely, due to the design, that it would be less maneuverable in atmosphere than the Colonial Viper due to its less conventional lifting body configuration and may have been designed to be unstable in all fight envelopes - with the slack taken up by computer control - as is common with many fictional and non-fictional fighter designs (A good example of this would be the Eurofighter Typhoon). Evolution Sharon Valerii has stated that the Cylon Raiders are very much like trained animals with basic thought and survival instincts. They also feel pain and trauma in the experience of death.During battle in the episode That Believeth in Me, a Raider scans a Viper piloted by T. Anders. The Raider, possibly believing Anders to be one of the Final Five Cylons withdraws, along with the other Raiders who refuse to fight. This act leads the Twos, the Sixes, and the Eights to believe the Raiders have developed will. The other models believe the Raiders have exceeded their original programming and vote, along with a single Number Eight, Boomer, to have the Raiders reconfigured back to their basic mode. The Twos, Sixes and other Eights protest vehemently and in retribution remove inhibitor modules from the Centurions, effectively giving them independent thought. The Centurions become angered by what the other models have considered the lobotomy of the Raiders and seek retribution on the models who voted for it. Notable individuals  Kara Thraces Cylon Raider In the episode Act of Contrition, Kara Starbuck Thrace shot down a Cylon Raider, but her Viper was damaged in the process and she was forced to eject, landing on a nearby moon.  In the course of the following episode, she located the downed Raider and discovered its biotechnological nature.   Experimenting with the various systems, she eventually managed to fly it back to Galactica, having previously written her callsign on the wings using adhesive tape, so that Galacticas fighter patrols wouldnt try to shoot her down - a tactic that was not entirely successful, as a brief dogfight ensued with Lee Apollo Adama before he got close enough to read it. The Raider was brought back to Galactica to be studied by Chief Tyrol and his team.In the first season finale, Kobols Last Gleaming, Thrace was ordered to use the Raider to transport a nuclear bomb on a mission to destroy a Cylon Basestar in the orbit of Kobol. However, President Roslin asked her to use the Raiders FTL capabilities to return to Caprica to retrieve the Arrow of Apollo instead. Disheartened by the fact that Commander Adama had lied to her and the rest of the crew about Earth, she pretended to embark on a final test mission, but jumped away to Caprica.On Cylon-occupied Caprica, Kara fought and killed a copy of Number Six in the Delphi museum.  Kara successfully retrieved the Arrow and met up with the stranded Galactica crewmember Karl Helo Agathon and a copy of her crewmate Sharon Boomer Valerii, revealing her to be a Cylon. Sharon (a Number Eight) fled in Karas Raider.  Sharon later returned minus the Raider (its fate is never shown or explained), but later stole a Heavy Raider, using it in an attack on several Centurions, and then transported all three back to Galactica. Scar right|thumb|180px|ScarAppearing in the episode of the same name, Scar was a particularly vicious and elusive raider identified by a gash on the side of its face.  Using highly effective hit-and-run, ambush and divide-and-conquer tactics, Scar repeatedly ambushed and destroyed Colonial viper patrols during mining operations in an asteroid field.Valerii pointed out that given the (previously unknown) ability of Cylon raiders to resurrect like their humanoid counterparts, Scars remarkable combat skill was likely due to having fought (and/or being destroyed by) Colonial pilots and learning from these previous encounters.  Valerii also suggested that due to the lack of a nearby Resurrection ship, Scar would be more difficult to beat, given its newly added fear of death.Eventually the raider was hunted down by Starbuck and Louanne Kat Katraine.  Kat destroyed Scar after Starbuck lured the raider into her sights.  Kat managed to destroy one of Scars wings, causing it to crash into an asteroid which destroyed it completely. As the resurrection ship had previously been destroyed, its death was permanent this time.As a final note, Valerii implied that Scar was Kara Thraces Raider (see above).  This could lead to the notion that Scar had a vendetta against the Colonial pilot.  However, the truth of this claim has not been addressed in canon thus far. References See also* Gort_(The_Day_the_Earth_Stood_Still) External links *Re-imagined Cylon Raider on the Wiki*Original Cylon Raider on the Wiki*Cylon Raider War-era Original Series 3D model of Original Cylon Raider*Re-imagined Cylon Raider 3D model of Re-imagined Cylon Raideres:Raiderja:Raider
4013189
Northeast_Greenland_National_Park
 governing_body   Northeast Greenland National Park () is the largest park in the world, with an area of ,(Statistics Greenland, Greenland in Figures, 2009) making the park larger than 163 countries. It is the only national park in Greenland, and the most northerly national park in the world, its most northerly point reaching slightly further than the most northerly point in National Park in Canada. The park encompasses the entire northeastern coastline and interior sections of Greenland.GeographyThe park shares borders, largely laid out as straight lines, with the Sermersooq municipality in the south and with the  Qaasuitsup municipality in the west along the 45 West meridian on the ice cap in the west. The large interior of the park is part of the Ice Sheet, but there are also large ice-free areas along the coast and on Land in the north.HistoryJosef Fjord, glacier.jpg|thumb|Franz Josef FjordOriginally created on 22 May 1974 from the northern, practically uninhabited part of the former Municipality in Tunu (East Greenland), in 1988 the park was expanded by another  to its present size, adding the northeastern part of the former county of Avannaa (North Greenland). In January 1977 it was designated an biosphere reserve. The park is overseen by the Greenland Department of Environment and Nature. The historical research camps on the ice sheetEismitte and Icefall within the boundaries of the present-day park.PopulationThe park has no permanent human population. In 1986, the permanent population of the park was 40, living at Mestersvig, although 400 sites saw occasional summertime use. These 40 were involved in cleanup and closeout operations at mining exploration sites and soon left. Since then censuses have recorded zero permanent human population. Recently only 31 people and about 110 dogs were present over winter in North East Greenland, distributed among the following stations (all on the coast, except Camp):()(NOAA Research)* Daneborg (12) headquarters of the Patrol, the park policing agency* Danmarkshavn (8) civilian weather station * Station Nord (5) military base* Mestersvig (2) military outpost with 1,800 m gravel runway* Zackenberg (0) summer-only research station* Camp (4) research station on the Ice SheetDuring summer scientists add to these numbers. The research station ZERO (Zackenberg Ecological Research Operations)  can cater for over 20 scientists and station personnel.FaunaAn estimated 5,000 to 15,000 ox as well as numerous bears and walrus can be found near the coastal regions of the park. This is claimed to be 40% of the world population of musk ox.() Other mammals include fox, stoat, collared lemming and hare. Other marine mammals include seal, seal, seal and seal as well as narwhal and whale.Species of birds which breed in the park include northern diver, goose, pink-footed goose, eider, eider, gyrfalcon, owl, sanderling, ptarmigan and raven.ReferencesSee also* of national parksExternal links* Main park webpage* Image gallery* UN website on park* ZERO - Zackenberg Ecological Research Operations* WWF Wildworld Ecoregion NA1112* Exploration History of Northeast Greenland   Nacional de Groenlandia del norestepark Sjeveroistoni Grenlandpark Severovchodn GrnskoNationalparkde:Nordost-Grnland-NationalparkrahvusparkNacional del noreste de GroenlandiaGroenlandiako natura parkeanational du Nord-Est du Groenland park Sjeveroistoni GrenlandGrnlandsnazionale della Groenlandia nordorientaleRyt Grenlandijos nacionalinis parkaspark Noordoost-Groenlandja:biosfrereservatNarodowy GrenlandiiNacional do Nordeste da Gronelndia    kansallispuistonationalpark zh:
4023420
Cantagallo
Cantagallo is an inland town in the state of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, about 100 miles by rail northeast of the port of Rio de Janeiro, with which it is connected by the Cantagallo railway. Cantagallo is situated in the fertile Parahyba Valley and is the commercial centre of a rich coffee-producing district. There are exhausted gold placer mines in its vicinity, but they were not rich enough to cause any considerable development in mining. Coffee production is the principal industry, but sugar-cane is grown to a limited extent, and some attention is given to the raising of cattle and swine. The district is an excellent fruit region.
4028790
Mary_Howitt
thumb|Marys portrait in a book|rightImage:Howittsm Abbeys and Castles.jpg|thumb|A book by William and Mary called Abbeys and Castles of Great Britain. It features a number of photographs and sells today (2007) for over 1000 pounds.(A book for sale for $1,750 accessed 2 October 2007)|rightthumb|Ansitz Mair am Hof. The summer retreat in Dietenheim, near Bruneck, 1871-1879thumb|Marienruhe M.A.H. in MeranImage:20061027 p102706sc-0339-1-771v.jpg|thumb|Former U.S. First Lady Bush just after reading from Mary Howitts book The Spider and the Fly on 27 October 2006 in Florida|rightMary Howitt (12 March 1799  30 January 1888) was an English poet, and author of the famous poem The Spider and the Fly. She was born Mary Botham at Coleford, in Gloucestershire, the temporary residence of her parents, while her father, Samuel Botham, a prosperous Quaker of Uttoxeter, Staffordshire, was looking after some mining property. Samuel had married his wife Ann in Wales in 1796 when he was 38 and she was 32. They had four children Anna, Mary, Emma and Charles. Their Queen Anne house is now known as Howitt Place.(Mary Botham was educated at home, and read widely; she commenced writing verses at a very early age.( Together with her husband she wrote over 180 books.(William Howitts entry in the Australian Dictionary of Biography accessed 4 October 2007)MarriageOn 16 April 1821 she was married in Uttoxeter to Howitt, and began a career of joint authorship with her husband. They lived initially in Heanor in Derbyshire where William was a pharmacist.(Mary Howitt site accessed October 2007)  It was not until 1823, when they were living in Nottingham, that William decided to give up his business with his brother Richard and concentrate with Mary on writing.( Their literary productions at first consisted chiefly of poetical and other contributions to annuals and periodicals, of which a selection was published in 1827 under the title of The Desolation of Eyam and other Poems.  William and Mary mixed with many of the important literary figures of the day including Dickens, Gaskell and Barrett Browning. In 1837 they went on a tour of the north and stayed with William and Dorothy Wordsworth.( Their work was well regarded, as can be seen from the minister Byngs present in 1839 from Queen Victoria. She gave him a copy of Marys book Hymns and Fireside Verses.( In the same year, her brother-in-law Howitt set out with his wife and her family to emigrate to Australia, arriving at Philip in April 1840.(Godfrey Howitt in Aust. Dict. of biography accessed 3 October 2007) The life of Mary Howitt was completely bound up with that of her husband; she was separated only from him during the period of his Australian journey (1851-4). On removing to Esher in 1837 she commenced writing her well-known tales for children, a long series of books which met with signal success.( They moved to London in 1843, and following a second move in 1844 they counted Tennyson amongst their neighbors.(ScandinaviaWhile residing at Heidelberg in 1840 her attention was directed to literature, and in company with her friend Schoultz she set herself to learn Swedish and Danish. She afterward translated and introduced Bremers novels (1842-1863, 18 vols.) to English readers. Moreover, Howitt also translated many of Christian Andersens tales, such as( * Only a Fiddler (1845)* The Improvisators (1845, 1847)* Wonderful Stories for Children (1846)* The True Story of every Life (1847).(Among her original works were The Heir of West Way Ian (1847). She for three years she edited the Drawing-room Scrap Book, writing (among other articles that would be included therein) Biographical Sketches of the Queens of England. She edited the Pictorial Calendar of the Seasons, translated Ennemosers History of Magic, and took the chief share in The Literature and Romance of Northern Europe (1852). She also produced a Popular History of the United States (2 vols. 1859), and a three-volume novel called The Cost of Caergwyn (1864).(In June 1852, the three male members of the family, accompanied by La Trobe Bateman, sailed for Australia in the hope of finding a fortune. William would be reunited with his brother Howitt, while Mary and her two daughters, the elder, Margaret, who had just returned from a year in Munich with Kaulbach (this adventure was later published as a book) moved into the  Hermitage, Mr Batemans cottage in Highgate. This had previously been occupied by Gabriel Rossetti.(Little Memoirs of the Nineteenth Century  accessed 3 October 2007)In 1851, her husband and her two sons traveled to Australia in the hope of finding their fortune, but they returned a number of years later; William wrote a number of books describing the flora and of Australia.( Her son, William Howitt, was to be renowned as an Australian explorer, anthropologist and naturalist and the discoverer of the remains of the explorers and Wills, which he brought to Melbourne for burial.Other children included: Herbert Charlton Howitt, who was drowned while engineering a road in New Zealand; Mary Howitt, wife of Alfred Alaric Watts, the biographer of her father, and author of An Art-Student in Munich, who died on a visit to her mother in Tirol in 1884;(Anna Mary Howitts ODNB entry: Retrieved 9 July 2011. Subscription required.) and Howitt, the writer of the Life of Bremer and of the memoir of her own mother.(William Howitt in the of National Biography)Her name was attached as author, translator, or editor to upwards of 110 works. She received a silver medal from the Academy of Stockholm, and on 21 April 1879 was awarded a civil list pension of 100. a year. In the decline of her life she joined the church of Rome, and was one of the English deputation who were received by Leo XIII on 10 January 1888. Her interesting Reminiscences of my Later Life were printed in Good Words in 1886. The death of her husband in 1879, and of her eldest child, A. A. Watts, in 1884, caused her intense grief. Times says, speaking of the Howitts: Their friends used jokingly to call them William and Mary, and to maintain that they had been crowned together like their royal prototypes. Nothing that either of them wrote will live, but they were so industrious, so disinterested, so amiable, so devoted to the work of spreading good and innocent literature, that their names ought not to disappear unmourned.Mary Howitt was away from her residence in Meran in Tyrol spending the winter in Rome when she died of bronchitis on 30 January 1888.(Her worksAmong the works written, like those already mentioned, independently of her husband, were: #  Sketches of Natural History (1834)#  Wood Leighton, or a Year in the Country (1836)#  Birds and Flowers and other Country Things (1838)#  Hymns and Fireside Verses (1839)#  Hope on, Hope ever, a Tale (1840)#  Strive and Thrive (1840)#  Sowing and Reaping, or What will come of it (1841)#  Work and Wages, or Life in Service (1842)#  Which is the Wiser? or People Abroad (1842)#  Little Coin, Much Care (1842)#  No Sense like Common Sense (1843)#  Love and Money (1843)#  My Uncle the Clockmaker (1844)#  The Two Apprentices (1844)#  My own Story, or the Autobiography of a Child (1845)#  Fireside Verses (1845)#  Ballads and other Poems (1847)#  The Childrens Year (1847)#  The Childhood of Mary Leeson (1848)#  Our Cousins in Ohio (1849)#  The Heir of Wast-Waylan (1851)#  The Dial of Love (1853)#  Birds and Flowers and other Country Things (1855)#  The Picture Book for the Young (1855)#  M. Howitts Illustrated Library for the Young (1856; two series)#  Lillieslea, or Lost and Found (1861)#  Little Arthurs Letters to his Sister Mary (1861)#  The Poets Children (1863)#  The Story of Little Cristal (1863)#  Mr. Rudds Grandchildren (1864)#  Tales in Prose for Young People (1864)#  M. Howitts Sketches of Natural History (1864)#  Tales in Verse for Young People (1865)#  Our Four-footed Friends (1867)#  John Oriels Start in Life (1868)#  Pictures from Nature (1869)#  Vignettes of American History (1869)#  A Pleasant Life (1871)#  Birds and their Nests (1872)#  Natural History Stories (1875)#  Tales for all Seasons (1881)#  Tales of English Life, including Middleton and the Middletons (1881)(The Spider and the FlyMary Howitts poem the Spider and the Fly was originally published in 1829. When Carroll was readying Adventures Under Ground for publication, he replaced a parody he had made of a negro minstrel song(Gardner, Martin., The Annotated Alice, 1998) with a parody of Marys poem. The Quadrille, which is an important part of Adventures in Wonderland, is a parody of Marys poem concerning a spider and a fly.(Lewis Carrolls parody of Marys poem accessed 3 October 2007)The poem was a Caldecott Honor Book in October 2007.(Childrens Book awards announced. New York Times 6 October 2007 accessed 8 October 2007)ReferencesExternal links**Complete list of her works**Papers of Mary and William Howitt are held at Manuscripts and Special Collections, The University of NottinghamFurther reading*Mary Howitt: an Autobiography, edited by her daughter, Margaret Howitt (1889)*C. R. Woodring, Victorian Samplers - William & Mary Howitt (1952)*A. Lee, Laurels and Rosemary - The Life of William & Mary Howitt (1955)Howitt
4034981
Wonderware
Wonderware is a brand of industrial automation and information software products, owned by Invensys Operations Management (IOM), itself a division of the UK technology company Invensys. More than 500,000 software licenses have been sold and installed in over 100,000 plants worldwide. Wonderware software is used in many industries  including utilities, mining, oil and gas, food and beverage, pharmaceuticals, transportation, pulp and paper, semiconductors and metals. Wonderware branded plant-to-enterprise integration products are also a part of the Invensys catalogue.Based in Forest, California, Wonderware operates a global network of authorized distributors -160 offices serving 130 countries. Local and regional systems integration and implementation services are provided through a network of 3500+ independent systems integrator companies.HistoryWonderware introduced InTouch software in 1987. It is claimed to be the first machine interface (HMI) based on the Microsoft Windows operating system.SolutionsWonderware sell real-time operations management industrial software which includes: Supervisory HMI, GeoSCADA, Production Management, MES, Performance Management, EMI, and integration with asset management, supply and demand chain and BPM/workflow applications.Wonderware also offers a line of industrial computers that includes Compact Panels running on Microsoft Windows CE, configured and deployed from a single development environment.Wonderware offers software in the areas of production and performance management, geographical SCADA and supervisory HMI.Some of Wonderwares products are the Wonderware Industrial Application Server, Wonderware System Platform, Wonderware Historian (also known as the IndustrialSQL Server or InSQL  historian), Wonderware Information Server (also known as SuiteVoyager software), Historian Client (known as ActiveFactory) reporting and analysis software, MES downtime tracking software and OEE software, (formerly known as Manufacturing Execution Module, Factelligence and InTrack software), Intelligence (EMI), ArchestrA Workflow (BPM) and InBatch software. Wonderware also offers many device integration tools.Wonderware products use ArchestrA technology, which integrates software and hardware from multiple vendors. Wonderwares Industrial Application Server was the first product built on the ArchestrA architecture.Wonderware sells a line of tablets and panel computers bundled with InTouch software, known as Wonderware Industrial Computers.External links*Wonderwares List of Products*Wonderware TR
4042974
Pertamina
Pertamina (Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak dan Gas Bumi Negara, lit. State Oil and Natural Gas Mining Company) is an Indonesian government-owned corporation which extracts and refines the countrys oil and gas reserves. It was created in August 1968 by the merger of Pertamin (established 1961) and Permina (established 1957). Pertamina is the worlds largest producer and exporter of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG).(http://www.hoovers.com/pertamina/--ID__55884--/free-co-profile.xhtml)HistoryNationalizationIn 1957, Dutch assets in petroleum were nationalized, from which Permina was founded as a state-owned oil monopoly, headed by Lieutenant-General Sutowo.(Vickers (2005), p. 185.) Ibnu Sutowos position as the second deputy of Haris Nasution was the beginning of the armys involvement in the oil industry.(Ricklefs, A History of Modern Indonesia Since c. 1300, 2nd ed., Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1994, p. 262.) Permina distributed oil for the entire archipelago. Permina founded the Apprentice Technical School (Sekolah Kader Teknik) in Brandan to train and produce experts in the field.  To meet this goal Permina established the Oil Academy in Bandung at 1962. Oil Academys curriculum pertains to the technical aspects of the oil industry, and the graduates turned into the main forces in Pertamin (which later transformed to Pertamina). In 1960, the Congress enacted a policy that the mining of Indonesian oil and ground gases are only permitted for the state, through a state-administered company. Pertamin, established in 1961, was responsible for the administration, management and controlling of the exploration and production.  The policy was short lived. An agreement between the state and foreign companies was affirmed that gradually, oil refinement manufactures and other assets in marketing and distribution were to be sold to Indonesia within five to fifteen years.In 1968, to consolidate oil and gas industry for its management, exploration, marketing and distribution, Permina and Pertamin merged and became PN. Pertamina. It continued to do little drilling itself, but made production-sharing agreements with foreign companies.The 1970sAfter the merge, Pertaminas production rose considerably (about 15% each in 1968 and 1969, and nearly 20% in 1973).(Ricklefs, 296) By the end of 1973, it directly produced 28.2% of Indonesias oil, with agreements of Caltex and Stanvac to produce the rest (67.8% and 3.6%, respectively). Its assets included seven refineries, terminals, 116 tankers, 102 other vessels and an airline. It was also active in cement, fertilizer, natural gas, steel, hospitals, estate, a rice estate, and telecommunications. The 1974 oil price increases produced revenues of $4.2 billion in that year, equivalent to approximately one sixth of Indonesias gross domestic product. Much of this revenue was used by Sutowo to expand Pertaminas interests far beyond oil production to include investments in oil tankers, steel and construction.(Schwarz (1994), p. 55) Pertamina built the Graha, the presidential executive office building in Jakarta.(Ricklefs, 301)  The global oil crisis of the 1970s greatly increased oil prices and profits. Pertamina initially provided a fiscal lift to the hopes of Indonesias development planners.For President Suharto and other members of the ruling elite, revenue from Pertamina an ongoing source of funding without accountability: they ran this cash-cow into the ground, using it for both military and personal ends.(Vickers, Adrian. 2005. A History of Modern Indonesia, Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press, p. 185.) Historian Adrian Vickers describes the endemic corruption at Pertamina:At each stage of the transaction chain somebody was getting a percentage... If accidents occurred, as in 1972 when eighty impoverished people died... they could be covered up.(Vickers, Adrian. 2005. A History of Modern Indonesia, Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press, p. 187.) In 1973, the governments ability to borrow money from overseas was constrained, and Pertamina was no longer providing revenues to the state.  Instead, the massive enterprise turned out not to be making money, but compiling exponentially large losses.  In February 1975, Pertamina could no longer pay its American and Canadian creditors.(McCawley, Peter. 1978. Some Consequences of the Pertamina Crisis in Indonesia, Jour of Southeast Asian Studies, IX(1), March.)   An investigation followed, which revealed over US$10 billion in debts, mismanagement, and corruption within the company.  This debt was equivalent to approximately thirty percent of Indonesias GNP at the time.()  Others offer a figure of a $15 billion debt.(cf., Vickers, Adrian. 2005. A History of Modern Indonesia, Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press, p. 185.) A public investigation hurt the reputation of the national elite both among Indonesians and foreigners.  The man most responsible for the collapse, Sutowo, was eventually dismissed.  He and his family were among the richest and most powerful in Indonesia, into the 21st century.(  The government took over the operation of the company and sought means by which to repay its debts.( Pertaminas debt problems were eventually solved through a large government bail-out, which nearly doubled Indonesias foreign debt.(Since the 1980sthumb|The Pertamina head office building in JakartaIn the 1980s, major partnerships with American and French firms produced vast quantities of petroleum.  Caltex, a joint Chevron-Texaco company, and S.A. were some of the largest foreign players.(Weissman, Robert. 1990. Rich Land, Poor People: The Economics of Indonesian Economic Development. The Multinational Monitor, October 1990 - Vol 11(no. 10).)Human rights observers have long expressed concerns about Indonesias hostility to labor unions.  According to the Monitor: In 1985, the government ordered the firing of over 1,600 workers at Pertamina and foreign oil companies, charging that they had been members of the Indonesian Communist Party, which had been banned 19 years earlier when Suharto took power. (Weissman 1990)In 2003 Pertamina legally became PT. Pertamina (Persero), as per the enactment of Government Regulation No.31/2003. Pertamina is now under the coordinator of the State Minister of State-owned Enterprises.Like other contractors, Pertamina holds Cooperation Contract to Oil and Gas Regulatory Body. With its transformation into a liability company, Pertamina has become a business entity with the main target of making a profit.FacilitiesCurrently Pertamina owns six oil refineries which have a capacity of 1,041.2 thousand barrels (Refinery Unit (RU) II in Dumai, RU III in Plaju, RU IV in Cilacap, RU V in Balikpapan, RU VI in Balongan, and RU VII in Kasim/Sorong), two gas reserves with a capacity of 31 tons per year, and a petrochemical company. Pertaminas products include a great variety of fuels, chemicals, additives, and retail products.Filling stationsFile:Pertamina filling station, Bali, Indonesia.jpg|thumb|right|200px|Pertaminas station in Bali, Indonesia.  There are separate filling islands for motorcycles and cars.Pertamina has by far the largest distribution network of petroleum products (stations, etc.) in Indonesia and is familiar to virtually all Indonesian citizens.Subsidiaries Pertamina EP PEP was established on 13 September 2005, to manage oil and gas operations (own operations) based on a Cooperation Contract (KKS) with BP Migas signed on 17 September 2005. As an upstream sector subsidiary, PEP carries out exploration and production of oil and gas in domestic working areas covering 140,000 km formerly managed by PERTAMINA. PEPs working area is divided into three regions: The Sumatra, Java, and Eastern Indonesian (KTI) Regions. The Sumatra Region covers the Rantau, Pangkalan Susu, Jambi, Pendopo and Prabumulih Fields, as well as the Pertamina EP Business Units (UBEP) at Jambi, Limau, Lirik, and Adera (ex JOB-EOR PERTAMINA Lekomaras, 22 April 2009). The Java Region covers The Cepu, Jatibarang, Subang and Tambun Fields. The Eastern Indonesian Region (KTI) covers: The Bunyu, Sangatta and Sorong Fields as well as the Tanjung and Sangasanga-Tarakan UBEPs. Pertamina Gas Pertamina established PT Pertagas on 23 February 2007, and it became PT Pertamina Gas in 2008. The company undertakes gas transportation, trading and processing. In the gas transmission business, Pertamina owns a gas pipeline network with a total volume of 34,000 km-inches in Northern Sumatra, Central Sumatra, Southern Sumatra, Western Java, Eastern Java, and East KalimantanIn January 2009, PT Pertamina Gas obtained a Transportation Permit and in February 2009, it received an exclusive right from BPH Migas for gas transportation along 43 transmission routes. These permit and exclusive rights complemented the business permit that had been issued previously (in September 2008). By obtaining a business license and special rights, PT Pertamina Gas now has a regulatory basis to play the principal role in the gas business in Indonesia. Pertamina Geothermal Energy PGE was founded on 12 December 2006. This Pertamina subsidiary carries out geothermal exploration and exploitation in 15 working areas (WKP) in Indonesia, namely: Sibayak-Sinabung, Sibual-bualiSarulla, Sungai Penuh-Sumurup, Tambang Sawah-Hululais, Lumut Balai, Waypanas-Ulubelu, Cibereum-Parabakti, Pengalengan (Patuha-Wayang Windu), Kamojang-Darajat, Karaha-Telagabodas, Dieng, Iyang-Argopuro, Tabanan-Bali, Lahendong-Tompaso and Kotamobagu. Pertamina EP Cepu PEP Cepu, which was established on 14 September 2005, is a subsidiary of PT Pertamina (Persero) that focuses on the upstream oil and gas business. In the Cepu Block, Pertamina has a 45% interest in partnership with Mobil Cepu Ltd (as the operator) and the Regional Owned Enterprise (BUMD) that manages the KKS for the Cepu Block. Pertamina Drilling Services Indonesia PT PDSI was established on 13 June 2008 as a drilling service management business entity. The services provided comprise drilling, workover activities, and drilling services that use a Daily Rate and Integrated Drilling Management (MPT) system for oil, gas, and geothermal wells. Presently, PT PDSI owned 34 drilling rigs (28 owned by PT PDSI and 6 transferred from PT Usayana) Pertamina Hulu Energy PHE is one of the Upstream Directorate subsidiaries working in the oil and gas upstream business, and is also an upstream business vehicle for managing the domestic and overseas cooperation portfolio in the form of: Production Sharing Contracts (PSC), Joint Operating Body-Production Sharing Contracts (JOB-PSC), Indonesian Participating / Pertamina Participating Interests (IP/PPI) and Badan Operasi Bersama (BOB). PHEs overseas working areas covered: Western Desert Block 3,Iraq; Block 10&11.1, Offshore South Vietnam; Block SK-305, Offshore Sarawak, Malaysia; Sabratah 17-3 Block, Offshore Libya; Sirte 123-3 Block, Libya; Block 13, Red Sea, Offshore Sudan; Block-3, Offshore Qatar; and Basker Manta Gummy Block, Australia.Products There are PERTAMINAs products; consist of Fuel (BBM), non-fuel, Gas, Petrochemical, and Lubricant.(http://www.pertamina.com/index.php/detail/read/our_products)Fuel (BBM)Fuel Products: * Kerosene* HSD (High Speed Diesel)* MDF (Marine Diesel Fuel)* MFO (Marine Fuel Oil)* Motor Gasoline (Such As : Premium 88 and Solar )Special Fuel  Special Fuel products :* Aviation Gasoline* Aviation Turbine Fuel* Bio Solar* Bio Pertamax (RON 92 + E5)* Pertamax (RON 92)* Pertamax Plus (RON 95)* Pertamina Dex (Diesel)Non-Fuel (Non-BBM) Non Fuel Products : * Asphalt* Calcined Coke* Green Coke* Heavy Aromate* Paraffin Wax* Pelarut (Solvent)* Pelumas (Lube Base Oil)* Slack WaxGas*Gas Products consists of LPG (Liquid Petroleum Gas), Gas Fuel (BBG), Musicool (Substitute refrigerant for CFC, with low pollution and environmentally friendly)PetrochemicalNumbers of PERTAMINAs Petrochemical Products.Lube Base Oil Provides information of PERTAMINAs Lube Base Oil Products based on their function: * Automotive Gear Oil* Circulating Oils* Heavy Duty Diesel Engine Oils* Industrial and Marine Engine Oils* Industrial and Hydraulic Oils* Passenger Car Oils* Powershift Transmissions and Heavy Equipment Hydraulic Oils* Refrigerating Oils* Two Stroke Gasoline Engine OilsReferencesExternal links*Official websitede:Pertaminafr:Pertaminaid:Pertaminajv:Pertaminanl:Pertaminaja:ru:Pertaminafi:Pertamina
4047989
Rovinari
websitehttp://www.primariarovinari.ro/Rovinari () is a town in County, southern Romania with a population of 12,603 . It is a mining city, nearby to surface and underground mines. A big thermo-electrical power plant functions close to the town.Image:2006 0610Rovinari0099.JPG|thumb|left|256px|The lignite-fired electricity generating station at RovinariImage:2006 0610Rovinari0101.JPG|thumb|left|256px|Another view of the stationde:Rovinarifa:id:Rovinariit:Rovinarihu:Rovinarinl:Rovinaripl:Rovinaript:Rovinariro:Rovinarisr:tg:
4054385
Bantam_(military)
A bantam, in army usage, was a soldier of less-than-average height.During the World War, the British Army raised battalions in which the normal minimum height requirement for recruits was reduced from 53 to 5. This enabled otherwise healthy young men to enlist.Bantam units were drawn from industrial and coal mining areas where short stature was no sign of weakness. The name derives from the former town of Bantam in Indonesia, from which a breed of small domestic fowl is thought to have originated. Bantamweight was a weight category in boxing that had originated in the 1880s and produced many notable boxers.The first bantam battalions were recruited in Birkenhead, Cheshire, after Bigland, MP, heard of a group of miners who, rejected from every recruiting office, had made their way to the town. One of the miners, rejected on account of his size, offered to fight any man there, and six men were eventually called upon to remove him. These were men used to physicality and hard work, and Bigland, incensed at what he saw as the needless rejection of healthy men, petitioned the War Office for permission to establish an undersized fighting unit.When the permission was granted, news spread across the country and men previously denied the chance to fight made their way to Birkenhead, 3,000 in all being divided into two battalions in November 1914. The requirement for their chest size was one inch more than the army standard.The men became local heroes, with the local newspaper, The Birkenhead News, honouring the men of the 1st and 2nd Birkenhead Battalions of the Cheshires with enamel badges - BBB - Biglands Birkenhead Bantams. Soon renamed the 15th and 16th Cheshires, they undertook gruelling training and served in some of the most hard fought battles of the war, such as the Battle of Arras in 1917. Eventually two whole divisions, the 35th and the 40th, were formed from Bantam men, but casualties, transfers to specialized Army tunneling companies, the introduction of conscription and replacement of some battalions by units from other divisions resulted in a major influx of taller men and eventually the Bantams became indistinguishable from other British divisions.External links*http://www.iwm.org.uk/server/show/ConWebDoc.2872*http://www.1914-1918.net/whatbantam.htm*BBC website feature on Bantam soldiers
4060918
SMCRA
#REDIRECT Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977
4068475
ATEX_directive
The ATEX directive consists of two EU directives describing what equipment and work environment is allowed in an environment with an explosive atmosphere. ATEX derives its name from the French title of the 94/9/EC directive: Appareils destins  tre utiliss en ATmosphres EXplosives. Directives thumb|right|200px|The CE mark which should be attached to EU certified equipmentAs of July 2006, organizations in EU must follow the directives to protect employees from explosion risk in areas with an explosive atmosphere.There are two ATEX directives (one for the manufacturer and one for the user of the equipment):* the ATEX 95 equipment directive 94/9/EC, Equipment and protective systems intended for use in potentially explosive atmospheres;* the ATEX 137 workplace directive 99/92/EC, Minimum requirements for improving the safety and health protection of workers potentially at risk from explosive atmospheres.Employers must classify areas where hazardous explosive atmospheres may occur into zones. The classification given to a particular zone, and its size and location, depends on the likelihood of an explosive atmosphere occurring and its persistence if it does. Areas classified into zones (0, 1, 2 for gas-vapor-mist and 20, 21, 22 for dust) must be protected from effective sources of ignition.() Equipment and protective systems intended to be used in zoned areas must meet the requirements of the directive. Zone 0 and 20 require Category 1 marked equipment, zone 1 and 21 required Category 2 marked equipment and zone 2 and 22 required Category 3 marked equipment. Zone 0 and 20 are the zones with the highest risk of an explosive atmosphere being present.()Equipment in use before July 2003 is allowed to be used indefinitely provided a assessment shows it is safe to do so.The aim of directive 94/9/EC is to allow the free trade of ATEX equipment and protective systems within the EU by removing the need for separate testing and documentation for each member state.The regulations apply to all equipment intended for use in explosive atmospheres, whether electrical or mechanical, including protective systems. There are two categories of equipment I for mining and II for surface industries. Manufacturers who apply its provisions and affix the marking and the Ex marking are able to sell their equipment anywhere within the European union without any further requirements being applied with respect to the risks covered being applied. The directive covers a large range of equipment, potentially including equipment used on fixed offshore platforms, in petrochemical plants, mines, mills and other areas where a potentially explosive atmosphere may be present. In very broad terms, there are three preconditions for the directive to apply: the equipment a) must have its own effective source of ignition; b) be intended for use in a potentially explosive atmosphere (air mixtures); and c) be under normal atmospheric conditions.The directive also covers components essential for the safe use and safety devices directly contributing to the safe use of the equipment in scope. These latter devices may be outside the potentially explosive environment.Manufacturers/suppliers (or importers, if the manufacturers are outside the EU) must ensure that their products meet essential health and safety requirements and undergo appropriate conformity procedures. This usually involves testing and certification by a third-party certification body (known as a Notified Body e.g. Sira, Baseefa, Lloyds, TUV) but manufacturers/suppliers can self-certify Category 3 equipment (technical dossier including drawings, hazard analysis and users manual in the local language) and Category 2 non-electrical equipment but for Category 2 the technical dossier must be lodged with a notified body. Once certified, the equipment is marked by the CE (meaning it complies with ATEX and all other relevant directives) and Ex symbol to identify it as approved under the ATEX directive. The technical dossier must be kept for a period of 10 years.Certification ensures that the equipment or protective system is fit for its intended purpose and that adequate information is supplied with it to ensure that it can be used safely. There are four ATEX classification to ensure that a specific piece of equipment or protective system is appropriate and can be safely used in a particular application: 1. Industrial or Mining Application; 2. Equipment Category; 3. Atmosphere; and 4. Temperature.(http://www.csunitec.com/atex/index.php ATEX Directive for Hydraulic and Pneumatic Power Tools)Technical definitions;Effective ignition sourceEffective ignition source is a term defined in the European ATEX directive as an event which, in combination with sufficient oxygen and fuel in gas, mist, vapor or dust form, can cause an explosion. Methane, hydrogen or coal dust are examples of possible fuels.(Michelis, J.: Explosionsschutz im Bergbau unter Tage, Verlag Glckauf Essen, 1998, ISBN 3-7739-0900-4)Effective ignition sources are:* Lightning strikes.* Open flames. This varies from a lit cigarette to welding activity. * Mechanically generated impact sparks. For example, a hammer blow on a rusty steel surface compared to a hammer blow on a flint stone. The speed and impact angle (between surface and hammer) are important; a 90 degree blow on a surface is relatively harmless. * Mechanically generated friction sparks.  The combination of materials and speed determine the effectiveness of the ignition source.  For example 4.5 m/s steel-steel friction with a force greater than 2 kN is an effective ignition source. The combination of aluminium and rust is also notoriously dangerous. More than one red hot spark is often necessary in order to have an effective ignition source.* Electric sparks.  For example a bad electrical connection or a faulty pressure transmitter. The electric energy content of the spark determines the effectiveness of the ignition source. * High surface temperature.  This can be the result of milling, grinding, rubbing, mechanical friction in a stuffing box or bearing, or a hot liquid pumped into a vessel. For example the tip of a lathe cutting tool can easily be 600 Celsius (1100 F); a high pressure steam pipe may be above the autoignition temperature of some fuel/air mixtures.* Electrostatic discharge.  Static electricity can be generated by air sliding over a wing, or a non-conductive liquid flowing through a filter screen.* Radiation.* Adiabatic compression.  Air is pumped into a vessel and the vessel surface heats up.See also* Equipment in Hazardous AreasReferencesExternal links* ATEX Explained* ATEX Explained* ATEX euronorm* Directive 1999/92/EC* ATEX Guidelines (Third edition - June 2009)* How To Choose the Correct Alloy For Your ATEX Application* ATEX Directive Details* ATEX Product Certification Services* ATEX Quality Assurance Notification (QAN)* ATEX Quality Assurance Notification (QAN)* ATEX Training & Competence de:ATEXATEXit:ATEXnl:ATEXpl:ATEXru:ATEXfi:ATEXsv:ATEX-direktivet
4074592
Harry_Clasper
Harry Clasper (5 July 1812  12 July 1870) was a famous Tyneside professional rower and boat-builder. He was an innovative boat designer who pioneered the development of the shell and the use of outriggers. He is said to have invented spoon-shaped oars. He was the first of three great Tyneside oarsmen, the other two being Robert Chambers and Renforth.Early historyHarry Clasper was born in Dunston, now part of the Borough of Gateshead, but then an independent village on the south bank of the Tyne, a mile upriver from Gateshead. Later his family moved to Jarrow, also on the south bank on the Tyne, downriver from Newcastle. At the age of 15, he began to work at Jarrow Pit, which was notorious for firedamp. After a while Clasper decided that mining did not suit him and he became apprenticed as a ships carpenter in Browns Boatyard, Jarrow. There he learnt about woodworking and the principles of boatbuilding. This would be useful to him in later life.After a while his family moved back to Dunston and Clasper became employed as a coke burner and wherryman for the Garesfield Coke Company at nearby Derwenthaugh. His work as a wherryman would also serve him well in later life. Clasper then worked for a while at Hawks, Crawshay and Sons Ironworks around the mid 1830s.In 1836 he married his cousin Susannah Hawks, a member of a wealthy family. Their wedding certificate shows Clasper signing with a cross, as he could not read or write, whilst Susannah signed her name.()RacingClasper formed a racing crew with his brother William and two other men. Harry rowed as stroke (the oarsman who sits nearest the stern, opposite the cox and who sets the stroke rate) and another brother, Robert, acted as cox. The boat was named Swalwell. The crew started well, winning several races and became known as the Derwenthaugh crew. Clasper took over the tenancy of the Skiff Inn, Derwenthaugh, and in addition to being a pub landlord, he began to build boats on the same site. He built two skiffs for himself, the Hawk in 1840 and the Young Hawk in 1841. With the latter he won the Regatta single sculls race in 1842.(Race against the ThamesThe Derwenthaugh crew was dominating the rowing scene on the Tyne and the logical progression was to challenge a crew from the Thames. This was done and the race was held on the Tyne on 16 July 1842. The race was rowed over a five mile (8 km) course from the Bridge to Lemington for a stake of 150 a side. The Thames crew gained an easy victory. The Derwenthaugh crews boat, St Agnes, although much narrower than the Thames boat (29 inches as against 40 inches), was 60% heavier than the Thames boat. Clasper realised that he needed to design and build a much lighter boat for future races.(The Five BrothersClasper had already started to build a new four-oared boat, called The Five Brothers. The completed boat had a five-strake, mahogany hull that had been French polished.It also had outriggers, as had the previous boat, the St Agnes. Outriggers had been used before, but were not universally in use. Despite being much lighter than the St Agnes, the new boat was still about 20% heavier than the boats being raced on the Thames. The Five Brothers made an appearance at the Thames Regatta in 1844 when the Derwenthaugh crew won a prize of 50 and narrowly missed winning the 100 top prize, the Champion Fours.( Lord RavensworthIn 1845 Clasper took another four-oared boat, the Lord Ravensworth, to the Thames Regatta. This latest boat was a further improvement on The Five Brothers. The crew were all Claspers, consisting of Harry at stroke, brothers William and Robert with uncle Ned, and brother Richard as cox. The Derwenthaugh crew won the Champion Fours, beating two other crews, including one from London. They were given the title of four-oared World Champions. The crew were given a heros welcome on returning to Newcastle. Clasper then sold the Lord Ravensworth for 80.(Later careerIn the next fifteen years, Clasper, with a variety of other crewmembers, won the Champion Fours at the Thames Regatta six further times. His crewmembers included his eldest son, John Hawks Clasper and Robert Chambers, later to be World Sculling Champion. His last victory was in 1859, when he was 47 years old.For many years he was a champion sculler on the Tyne and in Scotland, but was never successful as a sculler at the Thames Regatta. His last competitive race was a sculling race on the Tyne in 1867, when he was 55. Unfortunately his younger opponent beat him easily.Clasper became a rowing coach using his experience of many races. He recommended rest, light and regular meals, walking and running, as well as two sessions on the water each day. He coached Robert Chambers, who became Tyne, Thames, England and World Sculling Champion.During his time racing and coaching he continued to be a pub landlord, and ran a succession of pubs, including the Clasper Hotel on Scotswood Road, Newcastle. He moved on from there and finally settled at the Tunnel Inn, Ouseburn. He ran this until his death in 1870.(DeathHe died on 12 July 1870, probably of a stroke. For his funeral, the coffin was transported from the Tunnel Inn, Ouseburn to St Marys Church, Whickam. Part of the journey was by paddle tug on the river, travelling over part of the course that had seen so many of his triumphs. Many thousands watched the funeral procession and burial. A memorial monument was erected over his grave in St Marys churchyard and can still be seen there.It is strange to recall now, in an age when competitive oarsmen average  in height and weigh 225lbs, that Harry Clasper was only  tall and weighed only 130lbs.(His effect on boat designOutriggersClasper realised early in his rowing career that, in order to produce faster racing boats, it was necessary to reduce the area of the hull in contact with the water, so as to produce less drag. At the time, boats were wide in the beam because the oar was attached to the gunwales, and the oarsman needed sufficient leverage. Wide boats had a large surface area in contact with the water. A way of getting round this problem was to attach outriggers to the side of the boat and attach the oars to the outer ends of the outriggers. This meant that the boat could be made as narrow as possible, thus reducing surface area, without affecting the leverage exerted by the oarsmen. Wooden outriggers had first been tried out on the Tyne in 1828, fitted to a sculling boat. Two years later, iron outriggers were fitted to a boat. It cannot be claimed that Clasper originated the idea of the outrigger, but he saw its potential in allowing the boat designer to produce a slimmer faster boat. In the early years, when the Derwenthaugh crew was racing against crews from the Thames, it was doing so in narrow-beamed boats with outriggers whereas the Thames crews were in wide beamed boats. The sight of Claspers boats winning races helped to establish the use of outriggers as a standard in rowing.Shell hullsAt the time when Clasper was starting to design racing boats, the standard boat hull was constructed of a number of strakes (or planks), with a keel projecting from bottom of the hull. Together with Matthew Taylor, another Tyneside boat-builder, he worked to reduce the surface area and drag. They did this by placing the keel inside the hull of the boat and constructing the hull with a single strake on each side. The surface would then be given several coats of varnish to give as smooth a finish as possible.It is difficult to say who was the first to initiate the idea of a single-strake hull. Robert Jewitt a boat-builder of Dunston on Tyne claimed that Clasper had copied the idea from him, a claim that Clasper denied. It was perhaps, unfortunate for Jewit that Claspers fame meant that he received the credit.Sliding seatsJ.C Babcock, of the Nassau Rowing Club of New York, is credited with inventing the sliding seat, which allowed oarsmen to add the power of their legs to the stroke. There were several attempts to develop one without success until Babcock showed that it could be used successfully in 1870.Prior to that, Claspers crews, and other Tyneside oarsmen had developed a technique of sliding on their fixed seats so as to make some use of their legs in producing a longer more powerful stroke. This became known as the traditional Tyne stroke.(References* Clasper, David, Harry Clasper, Hero of the North.* Clasper, David, Rowing: A Way of Life - The Claspers of Tyneside 2003* Dillon, Peter, The Tyne Oarsmen (Clasper Chambers & Renforth) 1993External links* Friends of Rowing History information* Harry Clasper information* Harry Clasper  Hero of Tyneside* North East Rowing information* Newcastle and Gateshead history* The sliding seat
4088050
Otto_Steinbrinck
laterworkGeneral Otto Steinbrinck (born 19 December 1888 in Lippstadt, died 16 August 1949 in am Lech) was a German industrialist and an accused in the Nuremberg Trial.As a highly decorated soldier in War I, Steinbrinck had an astounding career in industry in the 1920s. Through the Freundeskreis Reichsfhrer SS he could fruitfully expand relationships with the Reichs leading circles. Steinbrincks leading position within the Flick conglomerate and his rle in integrating coalmines and industry in occupied European lands into the German economy were what in the end brought him before the court at Nuremberg.Early lifeThe schoolteachers son was from 1907 a professional soldier in the German Navy, and as of 1911 saw service on several submarines,. In World War I, Steinbrinck was the most successful U-boot commandant; in 1916, he was decorated with the le Mrite (he sank 206 ships). However, in 1919, after the Empire had lost the war, no further use could be found for him in the reconstituted Reichswehr, and so he was discharged with the rank of Kapitnleutnant.First, Steinbrinck functioned as a company director of the Organization of German Iron and Steel Industrialists, until he found a new post in 1924 at the Flick conglomerate, where he became First Associate in Friedrich Flicks private secretariat by 1925 and later rose to vice president. Steinbrinck also worked as a board member in many companies.Nazi careerIn May 1933, Steinbrinck joined the Socialist German Workers Party (NSDAP) and soon became a Standartenfhrer in the SS, later becoming an SS Oberfhrer in April 1935. Soon after that, he was a member in the so-called Freundeskreis der Reichsfhrer SS, a rather exclusive circle whose leader was Keppler. Between 1937 and 1939, Steinbrinck functioned as a general plenipotentiary for the Flick conglomerate. Moreover, he carried out various other functions, becoming in April 1938 a Wehrwirtschaftsfhrer  a title given industrialists who were important to Germanys armament industry  and as of January 1939 an SS Brigadefhrer.In the summer of 1939, he resigned from Flick and as of December of the same year began work as a trustee at ThyssenKrupp. Shortly before this, he had also been remobilized as a frigate captain. From May 1940 until March 1942, Steinbrinck worked as a general plenipotentiary for the steel industry in Luxembourg, Belgium and France, and functioned in April 1941 as an associate in the presidium of the Reichsvereinigung Kohle (Reich Coal Association).From March 1942 until the evacuation of the western occupation zones in the autumn of 1944, Steinbrinck was also general plenipotentiary for the Reichsvereinigung Kohle for mining and coal economy in the Netherlands, Belgium and France, the so-called Beko (Befehlskommando) West. In April 1945  World War II had by now long ago been lost  Steinbrinck operated as a link between Ruhr industry and Army Group B under Generalfeldmarschall Model.Flick TrialIn August 1945, Steinbrinck was arrested by the Americans and faced charges at the so-called Flick Trial in Nuremberg. On 22 December 1947, he was sentenced to 6 years in prison. Shortly before the wave of general amnesty began, Steinbrinck died in custody.SteinbrinckSteinbrinck
4101640
Cedar_Mountain_Wilderness
The Cedar Mountain Wilderness is located in northwestern Utah, USA, just south of 80. The vegetation on the upper elevations of the Cedar Mountains is dominated by junipers (referred to as cedars by early pioneers). The foothill and valley regions include mixed desert shrubs. Cheatgrass is prevalent over large areas burned by range fires. The remains of an aragonite mining camp can also be found in the foothills.The Cedar Mountain Wilderness includes more than half of the 180,000 acre (728 km) Cedar Mountain Herd Management Area, where feral horses have grazed since they were introduced in the late 19th century. A survey conducted in December 1991 counted 444 horses, and parts of the herd can often be seen on the wilderness. The of Land Management fills watering troughs for the horses when springs dry up in the summer. This artificial water supply benefits other wildlife species such as pronghorn antelope.The U.S. Congress designated the Cedar Mountain Wilderness primarily in response to an effort by members of the Utah congressional delegation and the Utah governor to block rail access to a proposed high-level nuclear waste storage facility on the nearby Valley Goshute Reservation. The project is sponsored by a consortium of power companies known as Private Fuel Storage, which received a license from the Regulatory Commission in February 2006. The facility has not yet been built. See also * Proving Grounds* of U.S. Wilderness Areas* Wilderness Preservation System* Act References * Lynna P. Howard, Utahs Wilderness Areas: The Complete Guide (Westcliffe Publishers, 2005) ISBN 978-1-56579-388-0* Bill Cunningham & Polly Burke, Wild Utah: A Guide to 45 Roadless Recreation Areas (Falcon Publishing, 1998) ISBN 978-1-56044-616-3* Bureau of Land Management, Utah BLM Statewide Wilderness Final Environmental Impact Statement: Volume II West-Central Region (BLM Utah State Office, 1990) External links * Bureau of Land Management: Cedar Mountain Wilderness* Wilderness.net: Cedar Mountain Wilderness* Google Maps satellite view
4107645
Jan_Egil_Storholt
}}Jan Egil Storholt (born 13 February 1949) is a former speed skater from Norway. He was born in Trondheim.BiographyTogether with Sjbrend, Stensen, and Stenshjemmet, Jan Egil Storholt was one of the legendary four S-es (which sounds like four aces in Norwegian), four Norwegian top skaters in the 1970s and early 1980s.Storholt was born in Trondheim, but grew up in the village of Lkken nearby. He became a member of sports club Falken (Falcon) in Trondheim. Falken was the club 1948 Olympic 1,500 m Champion Farstad and three-time 1952 Olympic Champion (on the 1,500 m, 5000 m, and 10000 m) Andersen had skated for.Storholt was the Norwegian Junior Champion in 1969, but when he was almost killed in a mining accident in 1970, he was told he would probably not be able to compete at the highest levels again, and it seemed that his promising career had already come to an end. However, Storholts determination got him back to the Norwegian top by 1972. After some of the best Norwegian speed skaters had turned professional in 1973 (and therefore also could no longer participate in the Olympic Games), Storholt suddenly was one of the best Norwegian amateurs.It still took until 1976 for his first major international successes: After having won bronze at the European Allround Championships that year, Storholt went on to win Olympic gold on the 1,500 m in Innsbruck. This made him the third Olympic 1,500 m Champion for sports club Falken. In 1977 he became European Allround Champion and was narrowly defeated by Heiden in the World Allround Championships. He won silver behind Heiden in three consecutive World Championships, and became European Allround Champion for the second time in 1979. This year he won his only Norwegian allround title as a senior.Storholt ended his speed skating career in 1981, after having won bronze in the World Championships.MedalsAn overview of medals won by Storholt at important championships he participated in, listing the years in which he won each:World recordsOver the course of his career, Storholt skated two world records:Personal recordsTo put these personal records in perspective, the WR column lists the official world records on the dates that Storholt skated his personal records.Note that Storholts personal record on the 5,000 m was not a world record because Stenshjemmet skated 6:56.9 at the same tournament.Storholt was number one on the Adelskalender, the all-time allround speed skating ranking, for a total of 30 days, divided over two short periods in 1977 and 1978. He has an Adelskalender score of 163.042 points.References* Eng, Trond. All Time International Championships, Complete Results: 1889 - 2002. Askim, Norway: WSSSA-Skytenytt, 2002.* Eng, Trond; Gjerde, Arild and Teigen, Magne. Norsk Skytestatistikk Gjennom Tidene, Menn/Kvinner, 1999 (6. utgave). Askim/Skedsmokorset/Veggli, Norway: WSSSA-Skytenytt, 1999.* Eng, Trond; Gjerde, Arild; Teigen, Magne and Teigen, Thorleiv. Norsk Skytestatistikk Gjennom Tidene, Menn/Kvinner, 2004 (7. utgave). Askim/Skedsmokorset/Veggli/Hokksund, Norway: WSSSA-Skytenytt, 2004.* Eng, Trond and Teigen, Magne. Komplette Resultater fra offisielle Norske Mesterskap p skyter, 1894 - 2005. Askim/Veggli, Norway: WSSSA-Skytenytt, 2005.* Teigen, Magne. Komplette Resultater Norske Mesterskap P Skyter, 1887 - 1989: Menn/Kvinner, Senior/Junior. Veggli, Norway: WSSSA-Skytenytt, 1989.* Teigen, Magne. Komplette Resultater Internasjonale Mesterskap 1889 - 1989: Menn/Kvinner, Senior/Junior, allround/sprint. Veggli, Norway: WSSSA-Skytenytt, 1989.External links* Jan Egil Storholt at SkateResults.com* Personal records from Jakub Majerskis Speedskating Database* Evert Stenlunds Adelskalender pages* Historical World Records from the International Skating Union* National Championships results from Norges Skyteforbund (the Norwegian Skating Association)Egil StorholtEgil StorholtEgil StorholtEgil StorholtEgil StorholtEgil Storholt Egil Storholt
4113846
Caetit
thumb|right|200px| flag of CaetitCaetit is a Brazilian city located in the state of Bahia, which possesses approximately 47,000 inhabitants and is situated 757 kilometers away from Salvador. Its 2306,38 km. Its economy is based mostly on amethyst mining, uranium, iron and manganese. Important cultural center of the State, there they were born illustrious people of the education and politics of the country, like Teixeira, Souto, Soriano (the brazilian Frank Sinatra) and others.fr:Caetitbpy:it:Caetitnl:Caetitno:Caetitpl:Caetitpt:Caetitro:Caetitru:vo:Caetitwar:Caetit
4119933
Thomas_W._Howie
 children        Margaret Howie Robert Wyllie Howie Bethia Howie Martha Howie Barbara Howie Jean HowieThomas Wyllie Howie, JP (8 April 1856 &ndash; 18 July 1927) was a Scottish of industry.BackgroundHowie was born in Ayrshire, on 8 April 1856 to Robert and Bethia Howie, into a wealthy industrial family who had been active in the Covenanting movement. He was born at the family home, Newhouse, an house nearby the fireclay mine which the family owned. There he was brought up alongside his cousin, who would become the mining magnate John Howie. The house is now a residential care home. Howies father, Robert, died at the Institution in Dumfries, a private lunatic hospital, when Thomas was 27.CareerHe and his wife settled in Falkirk where he became a partner in & Co Fireclay Works and coal mine, Roughcastle. He later became owner of the business. Previous to settling in Falkirk the Howie family lived in Hurlford, where they owned the renowned Fireclay Works (until it was bought by Shanks), which produced pottery, bricks, chimneys, garden ornaments and enamelled sanitary ware (lavatories, baths, urinals etc.) The family owned much of the town, including Marchmont Place, Salisbury Place, Collier Row, Office Row, Chapel Cottages, Skerrington Row and Howies Square. They also owned small mining villages, including Hemphill.A supporter of the Unionist Party, Thomas Howie was a of the Peace and elected a Stirling County Councillor for Falkirk, Vice-Chairman of the Parish Council, as well as Chairman of the Landward Committee.FamilyHowie married Barbara Picken, sister of the Clerk of Glasgow, and had six children: Margaret, Robert Wyllie, Bethia, Martha, Barbara and Jean. His sons attended the School of Glasgow and his daughters St. Georges School for Girls, Edinburgh.Death and legacyAt a Board outing he was taken ill and never recovered, dying in 1927. The local newspaper at the time remembered him as a bright and cheery man, and notes that he took a deep interest in parochial affairs and was particularly sympathetic towards the deserving poor. Thomas Howie is buried in Falkirk Cemetery. On his death, his share of the brickworks business was valued at 12,000, which is equivalent to over 2,300,000 in todays terms (relative GDP per capita).Street named after himA street, Howie Place, in Falkirk, is named after him. It is nearby the site of the brickworks he once owned.Family*Thomas Howie was the cousin of industrialist Howie (businessman)*Thomas Howie was a distant cousin of writer John Howie*Thomas Howie was the great-grandfather of actor Coltrane*Thomas Howie was the first cousin twice removed of the current Lord GlenarthurExternal links* FutureMuseum page on Hurlford Fireclay Works* List of Mines* List of Miners Streets Owners
4131101
Raleigh_Grey
Sir Raleigh Grey KBE CMG CVO (24 March 1860 &ndash; 10 January 1936) was a pioneer British coloniser of Rhodesia who played an important part in the early government of the colony.Early careerGrey, the great-grandson of 1st Earl Grey, was educated at School and College, Oxford. In 1881 he joined Inniskillings (6th Dragoons) and saw service in the War. When the war ended he was in command of the Bechuanaland Border police, and in the Matabeleland rebellion of 1893 he commanded a column of the army. From 1894 to 1897 his kinsman the 4th Earl Grey was Administrator of Rhodesia, and Grey accompanied Starr Jameson on the Raid in 1895; in the aftermath of the raid, Grey served five months imprisonment.()Southern Rhodesia ColonyWhen Southern Rhodesia was granted a part-elected Legislative Council, Grey was elected at the first election in 1899 to represent Mashonaland. It was subsequently discovered that his supporters had committed bribery and treating of potential voters, and Grey resigned in order to be re-elected free of the taint of electoral corruption. After serving in the Boer War, Grey retired from the Army in 1904 but remained Commandant of the local Volunteers. He established the company Rhodesia Lands, Ltd. to develop mining and farming interests: the Jumbo mine owned by his company became one of the most profitable. He was made a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1919.Political developmentIn the early 1920s the Southern Rhodesians decided to break away from the sponsorship of the South Africa Company. The issue among the leading figures of the colony was whether to obtain their own Responsible Government or to seek membership of the of South Africa. Grey strongly believed that joining South Africa would be preferable, and argued forcibly for it in the Legislative Council. However the majority there and among the public was against him, and as a result he lost his seat in the 1920 election.Later lifeGrey took this repudiation in good heart but did not participate in politics again, turning his attention to his business interests. In the late 1920s he returned to Britain, and died in a nursing home in London in 1936.References* Obituary, Times, 11 January 1936
4135863
Grupo_Mxico
homepage        www.gmexico.comGrupo Mxico (BMV: GMEXICOB) is the largest mining corporation in Mexico and the third largest copper producer in the world. Ferrocarril Mexicano (Ferromex), the companys rail transport division, operates the nations largest rail fleet.HistoryThe company was founded by Antonio Escobedo and Larrea in 1988. After the government of Salinas declared the state mining company bankrupt, Larrea purchased key Mexican copper mines in Cananea and Nacozari (cities in the state of Sonora). He also purchased numerous other mining sites, including coal mines in the state of Coahuila. By 2000, Grupo Mxico was responsible for 87.5 percent of Mexicos copper production and is the worlds third-largest copper producer in the world.Grupo Mxico has been in continual conflict with Local 65, the traditionally militant Cananea branch of the Mexican Mine Workers Union (SNTMMSRM). During miners strikes in January 2003 and October 2004, Grupo Mxico responded with threats to close the Cananea mines. In 2004, Grupo Mxico has also purchased a controlling interest in the Peru Copper Corporation.  Grupo Mexico acquired 54.2% equity interest in Southern Peru Copper Corporation from ASARCO LLC, a mining company operating in the United States. The SPCC equity sale is subject to a litigation between Grupo Mexico and ASARCO pending in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Texas under District Court Judge Andrew Hanen. As of September 2009, ASARCO was the focus of a bidding war begun in May 2008 between its own parent company Grupo Mxico and India-based Sterlite Industries. On August 31, 2009, U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Richard Schmidt recommended that U.S. District Judge Andrew Hanen accept Grupo Mxicos $2.5 billion bid for ASARCO as it prepares to come out of bankruptcy. Pasta de Conchos mine disasterOn February 19, 2006, an explosion occurred in a coal mine in Juan de Sabinas, Coahuila, that is owned by Grupo Mxico. It was reported that mine workers had gone on strike against Grupo Mxico at least 14 times, not only for salary increases but because of its constant refusal to review security and health measures. Grupo Mxico said that they, in conjunction with the mining union, signed a certificate on February 7, 2006 declaring the mine safe.(Search for Mexican miners suspended Diario, Jurez, February 25, 2006.)Although the mining operations of a coal deposit is always a risky business, due to the possibility of huge gas concentrations, there are certain theories that indicate the mine has an important lack of safety rules, very similar to the problem presented in the Mine disaster in West Virginia with the accident that caused death of 12 miners on January 2, 2006.After the successful rescue of 33 trapped miners in October 2010 in Copiap, Chile, the case gain popularity again, and many people including bishop Ral Vera  demanded that the case be reopened. Grupo Mxico has not responded.(Chilean rescue revives anger in Mexico over 2006 miners tragedy, Monsters and Critics, October 14, 2010.)Rail OperationsGrupo Ferroviario Mexicano, S.A. de C.V.Runs Mexicos largest and most profitable railroad with near 6,000 miles of tracks and 15,000 carloads, transporting over 40% of all the railroad cargo of the country. GMEXICO acquired the rail concession from the Mexican federal government for 100 years in 1998. GMEXICO owns 74% and Union Pacific 26% of the company. The railroad, known as FERROMEX, has the largest coverage of the nations railway system. The railroad system connects the main cities in the country, where 70% of industrial production is created and services five land ports on the border with USA, four seaports on the Pacific Ocean and two on the Gulf of Mexico.Intermodal Mxico, S.A. de C.V.Operates since November 2001. Its objective is to develop and provide multi-modal services and logistics for load transportation. For such purposes it has constructed facilities in Guadalajara, Monterrey, Torren, Silao, Saltillo and is in the process of constructing several other facilities in major cities of central and Northern Mexico.Texas Pacifico, Inc.Holds and operates the Texas Pacifico railroad in the United States that interconnects the border point Chihuahua&ndash;Texas with the city of Worth, Texas.FERROSUROn November 25, 2005, the railroad division acquired the company Ferrosur, creating a monopoly over the industry. This Transaction was duly notified to the Mexican Antitrust Commission.Notes#  US Geological Survey; Gillian OConnor, LatAm copper giants want place on global stage, Times, 24 August 2000.#  Grupo Mexico Threatens to Shut Down Cananea if Strike Continues, Engineering and Mining Journal, Vol. 204, No. 4, February 2003, pages 1415; Workers Strike at Mexican Copper Mine, Press, 15 October 2004.#  Sara Silver, Approval expected for Grupo Mexico/ S Peru Copper, Times, 23 October 2004.#  Mexican mine blast traps workers, News, 20 February 2006. Link to articleReferences(External links*Grupo Mxico*Profile on FinanceMxicoMxicoMxico
4142483
Bolgatanga_Municipal_District
footnotes           The Bolgatanga Municipal District is a of Ghana in the East Region.DemographicsThe inhabitants of the district belong predominantly to different peoples of Northern Ghana. The town of Bolgatanga, however, has a cosmopolitan character. Here are mixed not only different peoples of the north, but also members of the major ethnic groups including the Akan, Ewe, and Ga peoples.ClimateThe climate is tropical with a rainy season from May to October and a long dry season with virtually no rainfall from October to April. Temperatures range between a maximum of 45 degrees in March / April and at least 12 C in December.The natural vegetation of the district consists of tree savanna, with baobab,  and acacia trees. The low vegetation is burned by fire during the dry season or dried by the sun.EconomyThe majority of the population in the 1990s lived, in spite of the urban structure of the district, from agriculture, 19% commercial, 12%  industry, mainly handicrafts, and just 7.4% were employed in public services.There are some jobs in the mining and construction and in the form of some metal-working companies, repair shops, painting companies etc. but these represent a very small minority.Important towns in addition to Bolgatanga include:*Tindonsobulugu*Yarigabisi*Dachio*Gambibigo-Azuabisi*Kumbosigo*Dorungu-AgobgabisSources* * GhanaDistricts.comMunicipal DistrictmunicipalitMunicipale di BolgatangaBolgatanga
4149830
Windisch
Windisch is a municipality in the district of Brugg in the canton of Aargau in Switzerland.HistoryWindisch is situated at the site of the Roman legion camp Vindonissa.  In 1064 the current municipality was mentioned as Vinse, and in 1175 as Vindisse.  Until the 19th Century the official name was Windisch und Oberburg.(  The village grew into a regional power following the foundation of Abbey in 1309 in memory of the regicide of King I of Germany in the previous year.  Albert was on the way to suppress a revolt in Swabia when he was murdered on May 1, 1308,  near Windisch on the River, by his nephew John of Swabi, afterwards called the Parricide or John Parricida, whom he had deprived of his inheritance.()  After the foundation of the Abbey, the village was placed under the authority of the Abbey.  Starting in 1348 the rights to high and low justice were held by Agnes of Hungary.  In 1411 those rights transferred back to the monastery.   The abbey church, possibly in antiquity under the patronage of St. Martin but in the Ages under the patronage of Mary, is built on the site of the 6th Century Bishops church.  The present building, with a late-Romanesque nave and Gothic choir, was built between 1310-30.  The churchs house was rebuilt in 1793 into a schoolhouse.(After the conquest of the Aargau by Bern and the introduction of the Reformation (1528) the monastery was suppressed.  Until 1798 it served as the residence of the Bernese bailiffs ().  People from Windisch worked in the bailiffs residence as servants, maids and workmen, while the poor came to the former abbey for alms.The main sources of income in Windisch included handicrafting, ferries, fisheries, shipping, tavern and iron ore mining in Lindhof, but agriculture was the major contributor.  There was a ferry over the Reuss river on the Bern-Zurich road.  This was replace in 1799 by a bridge.  Plague epidemics (in 1667 60% of the population died of the plague) and the restrictive immigration policies of the municipality prevented growth.  However, during the 18th Century, the emergence of new occupations, led to a significant population increase.  These new industries included cap and stocking weaving, and water powered light industry (including plaster and flour mills).  At the same time improved agriculture techniques allowed more food to be produced from the fields.  The nearest neighbor to Windisch was the town of Brugg.  The close proximity led to centuries of conflicts over grazing rights, city monopolies, taxation and especially the location of the municipal boundary.  In 1863, due to a border adjustment, Windisch lost  to Brugg.In the 19th Century the economy of the village changed.  In 1825 Henry Kunz founded the mill Kunz which had 567 employees in 1846.  They built factory workers homes and a village school.  In 1804 part of Knigsfelden Abbey converted into a District Hospital.  In 1872 a new building was built and since 1887 it has been a psychiatric clinic.  The construction of the railway network transformed Brugg and Windisch into a railroad hub with a large depot and repair shop (primarily for steam locomotives).  These innovations resulted in the influx of factory workers, nurses and trained staff.  This led to a restructuring of the population: for example, the locally born and working population fell from 88% (1815), 55% (1837) and 21% (1900) to 4% (1970), while the proportion of Catholics rose from 9% (1850) to 45 % (1970).  Agriculture employs only 0.6% of the population (1990).  In 1965, a Higher Technical School of Windisch (now a university) opened.  The changing population structure led to political shifts in favor of the Social Democratic Party (SP) (1921-49 was known as the period of the red Windisch). With a pronounced emphasis on political independence, Windisch grew together structurally and economically with Brugg.(GeographyWindisch has an area, , of .  Of this area,  or 23.6% is used for agricultural purposes, while  or 24.8% is forested.   Of the rest of the land,  or 45.4% is settled (buildings or roads),  or 6.3% is either rivers or lakes.(Swiss Federal Statistical Office-Land Use Statistics 2009 data  accessed 25 March 2010)Of the built up area, industrial buildings made up 5.3% of the total area while housing and buildings made up 21.6% and transportation infrastructure made up 9.6%.  Power and water infrastructure as well as other special developed areas made up 1.8% uof the area while parks, green belts and sports fields made up 7.1%.  22.4% of the total land area is heavily forested and 2.4% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees.  Of the agricultural land, 13.8% is used for growing crops and 6.9% is pastures, while 2.9% is used for orchards or vine crops.  All the water in the municipality is in rivers and streams.(The municipality is located in the Brugg district, between the Aare and rivers in the region known as the Wasserschloss.  It consists of the former villages of Windisch  and Oberburg as well as the hamlets of Fahrgut, Schrhof, Lindhof and Bachtalen and the region around the former Abbey.Coat of armsThe blazon of the municipal of arms is Or on a Sevenfold Mount Vert a Castle embattled Sable towered on dexter and to its sinister a Lion rampant Gules.(Flags of the World.com accessed 12-April-2010)DemographicsWindisch has a population (lcon) of   , 29.1% of the population are foreign nationals.(Statistical Department of Canton Aargau -Bereich 01  -Bevlkerung  accessed 20 January 2010)  Over the last 10 years (19972007) the population has changed at a rate of 4.5%.  Most of the population () speaks German (80.6%), with Italian being second most common ( 4.9%) and Serbo-Croatian being third ( 3.2%).(Swiss Federal Statistical Office accessed 12-April-2010)The age distribution, , in Windisch is; 732 children or 11.0% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 783 teenagers or 11.8% are between 10 and 19.  Of the adult population, 837 people or 12.6% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old.  888 people or 13.3% are between 30 and 39, 1,017 people or 15.3% are between 40 and 49, and 826 people or 12.4% are between 50 and 59.  The senior population distribution is 693 people or 10.4% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 525 people or 7.9% are between 70 and 79, there are 302 people or 4.5% who are between 80 and 89,and there are 55 people or 0.8% who are 90 and older.(Statistical Department of Canton Aargau -Bevlkerungsdaten fr den Kanton Aargau und die Gemeinden (Archiv)  accessed 20 January 2010) the average number of residents per living room was 0.57 which is about equal to the cantonal average of 0.57 per room.  In this case, a room is defined as space of a housing unit of at least  as normal bedrooms, dining rooms, living rooms, kitchens and habitable cellars and attics.()  About 32.9% of the total households were owner occupied, or in other words did not pay rent (though they may have a mortgage or a rent-to-own agreement).(Urban Audit Glossary pg 17), there were 316 homes with 1 or 2 persons in the household, 1,576 homes with 3 or 4 persons in the household, and 774 homes with 5 or more persons in the household.  The average number of people per household was 2.29 individuals.(  , there were 2,726 private households (homes and apartments) in the municipality, and an average of 2.3 persons per household.(   there were 763 single family homes (or 24.9% of the total) out of a total of 3,066 homes and apartments.(Statistical Department of Canton Aargau  accessed 20 January 2010)  There were a total of 16 empty apartments for a 0.5% vacancy rate.(  , the construction rate of new housing units was 0.6 new units per 1000 residents.(In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SVP which received 32.7% of the vote.  The next three most popular parties were the SP (23%), the CVP (12.6%) and the FDP (10.7%).(In Windisch about 61.8% of the population (between age 25-64) have completed either non-mandatory upper secondary education or additional higher education (either university or a Fachhochschule).(  Of the school age population (), there are 579 students attending primary school, there are 316 students attending secondary school, there are 302 students attending tertiary or university level schooling in the municipality.(The historical population is given in the following table:()Heritage sites of national significanceThere are five sites in Windisch that are listed as Swiss heritage site of national significance.  The oldest is the celtic/roman military fort and settlement of Vindonissa.  The other large site is the church of the former Knigsfelden Abbey with its glass paintings of 1325, Agnes chapel, comptrollery and convent building.  The other three are the former Upper Technical School at Klosterzelgstrasse, the former cotton mill Kunz at Alte Spinnerei 4,5 and the psychiatric clinic of Knigsfelden.(Swiss inventory of cultural property of national and regional significance 21.11.2008 version,  accessed 12-Apr-2010)File:Amphitheater of Vindonissa.jpg|Amphitheater of VindonissaFile:Knigsfelden05.jpg|Church of Knigsfelden AbbeyFile:Koenigsfelden 04.jpg|Interior of Knigsfelden Abbey ChurchFile:Windisch Villa.jpg|Villa near the Kunz cotton millFile:Vindonissa 01.jpg|Psychiatric clinic of KnigsfeldenEconomy, Windisch had an unemployment rate of 2.52%.  , there were 20 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 9 businesses involved in this sector.  353 people are employed in the secondary sector and there are 46 businesses in this sector.  2,308 people are employed in the tertiary sector, with 195 businesses in this sector.( there was a total of 3,181 workers who lived in the municipality.  Of these, 2,446 or about 76.9% of the residents worked outside Windisch while 1,765 people commuted into the municipality for work.  There were a total of 2,500 jobs (of at least 6 hours per week) in the municipality.(Statistical Department of Canton Aargau-Bereich 11  Verkehr und Nachrichtenwesen  accessed 21 January 2010)  Of the working population, 20.6% used public transportation to get to work, and 39% used a private car.(ReligionFrom the , 2,288 or 34.4% were Catholic, while 2,252 or 33.9% belonged to the Reformed Church.  Of the rest of the population, there were 5 individuals (or about 0.08% of the population) who belonged to the Christian Catholic faith.(Statistical Department of Canton Aargau - Aargauer Zahlen 2009  accessed 20 January 2010)ReferencesExternal links* als:Windischca:WindischAGes:Windischeo:Windischfr:Windisch(Svizzera)lmo:Windischnl:Windischpms:Windischpt:Windischru:simple:Windischsv:Windischuk:vo:Windischwar:Windisch
4153791
Similarity_heuristic
The similarity heuristic is a lesser-known psychological heuristic pertaining to how people make judgments based on similarity. More specifically, the similarity heuristic is used to account for how people make judgments based on the similarity between current situations and other situations or prototypes of those situations.  At its most basic level, the similarity heuristic is an adaptive strategy. The goal of the similarity heuristic is maximizing productivity through favorable experience while not repeating unfavorable experiences. Decisions based on how favorable or unfavorable the present seems are based on how similar the past was to the current situation.For example, a person may use the similarity heuristic when deciding on a book purchase. If a novel has a plot similar to that of novels read and enjoyed or the author has a writing style similar to that of favored authors, the purchasing decision will be positively influenced. A book with similar characteristics to previously pleasurable books is likely to also be enjoyed, causing the person to decide to obtain it.BackgroundThe similarity heuristic directly emphasizes learning from past experience. For example, the similarity heuristic has been observed indirectly in experiments such as phonological tests. These tests observe how well a person can distinguish similar sounds from dissimilar ones based on a comparison to previously heard sounds. While not involving a decision making process characteristic to heuristics in general, these studies show a reliance on past experience and comparison to the current experience. In addition, the similarity heuristic has become a valuable tool in the field of economics and consumerism.Real-world examplesThe similarity heuristic is very easy to observe in the world of business, both from a marketing standpoint and from the position of the consumer. People tend to let past experience shape their world view; thus, if something presents itself as similar to a good experience had in the past, it is likely that the individual will partake in the current experience. The reverse holds true for situations that have proven unfavorable. A very basic example of this concept is a person deciding to get a meal at a particular restaurant because it reminds them of a similar establishment.MarketingCompanies often use the similarity heuristic as a marketing strategy. For example, companies will often advertise their services as something similar to a successful competitor, but better  such a concept is evident in the motion picture industry. Trailers for upcoming films will promote the latest movie as being made by a particular director, citing said directors past film credentials. In effect, a similarity heuristic is created in an audiences mind; creating a similarity between the coming attraction and past successes will likely make people decide to see the upcoming film.Automotive parts companies and their distributors and dealers leverage similarity heuristics when they interchange the term, OEM (original equipment manufacturer), and OE (original equipment).  For example, the OE design specifications may ask for a certain durability factor, corrosion resistance, and material composition.  The OEM realizes they can produce the same part less expensively and with possibly greater profit, if they do not adhere to all or most of the OE design specifications.  By marketing their product as OEM against a well-known brand or product (e.g., Mercedes-Benz), they predict that enough customers will purchase their OEM product vs. the OE product.  The converse happens when the OE factory (e.g., Mercedes-Benz) promotes their brand of a commodity product (e.g., anti-freeze/coolant, spark plugs, etc.) as superior or better quality than the commodity product.In addition, the use of a reverse similarity heuristic can be a highly valuable marketing tool. For example, when Nintendo wished to launch its Entertainment System (NES) in the United States, it did so in the middle of a video game depression; Atari had managed to make video games one of the least popular American pastimes. Initial showing of the NES were met poorly  clearly, a similarity heuristic was in place, and people had created biases against anything relating to interactive television gaming.  Nintendos goal, then, became the differentiation of their system from the past examples. Employing a dissimilarity heuristic, Nintendo managed to create enough of a gap from the former video game industry and market a successful product.Problem SolvingSome professions, such as developers, regularly utilize the similarity heuristic. For software developers, the similarity heuristic is utilized when performing debugging tasks. A software bug exhibits a set of symptoms indicating the existence of a problem. In general, similar symptoms are caused by similar types of programming errors. By comparing these symptoms with those of previously corrected software flaws, a developer is able to determine the most probable cause and take an effective course of action.  Over time, a developers past experiences will allow their use of the similarity heuristic to be highly effective, quickly choosing the debugging approach that will likely reveal the problems source.solving in general is benefitted by the similarity heuristic. When new problems arise similar to previous problems, the similarity heuristic selects an approach that previously yielded favorable results. Even if the current problem is novel, any similarity to previous issues will help choose a proper course of action. See also * reasoning* reasoningReferences*External links*Colet, Ed (1999). Interpreting Data Mining Results: The Influence of Heuristics. Retrieved February 21, 2006.*Russell, Stuart (1988). Analogy by Similarity. Retrieved February 21, 2006.*Read, Daniel Grushka-Cockayne, Yael.  (2007).  The similarity heuristic*Walker, Donald (2007).  Similarity Determination and Case Retrieval in an Intelligent Decision Support System for Diabetes Management
4161291
Southern_Rhodesian_Legislative_Council_election,_1914
The Southern Rhodesia Legislative Council election of 18 March 1914 was the sixth election to the Legislative Council of Rhodesia. The Legislative Council had resolved in 1913 that it should have twelve elected members, together with six members nominated by the South Africa Company, and the of Southern Rhodesia. The Resident Commissioner of Southern Rhodesia also sat on the Legislative Council ex officio but without the right to vote. This office was first held by Robert Burns-Begg, from April 1, 1915 by Herbert James Stanley, and from April 1, 1918 by Crawford Douglas Douglas-Jones.FranchiseIn 1912 the franchise arrangements had been altered for the first time since the Legislative Council was established. To be eligible for registration as an elector, the voter had to be a British subject by birth or naturalization, male, over the age of 21, and to have lived in Southern Rhodesia for six months continuously, as before. Where previously a voter had to be able to sign their name and write their address and occupation, they were now required to be able to complete the registration form in their own handwriting if required, and to write from dictation fifty words in the English language.The means qualifications were doubled, so that voters had to have either occupied immovable property worth 150 within the electoral district, or have received salary or wages of 100 per annum. As before, ownership of a registered mining claim in Southern Rhodesia also qualified a voter, whether resident or not.BoundariesNew districts were drawn up for this election by a delimitation board. A policy decision was made that each district should return a single member, and the delimitation board was charged with producing district with an equal number of voters, taking into account community or diversity of interests, means of communication, physical features and sparsity or density of population. The board was permitted to depart by up to 20% from absolute equality if it thought fit. In the end, three of the districts were almost entirely urban (Salisbury, Bulawayo North and Bulawayo South) while all the others contained substantial areas of countryside.PartiesPrevious elections to the Legislative Council were contested by individuals standing on their own records. By 1914, although no political parties had been created, the candidates for the Legislative Council were broadly grouped in two camps. The first camp were supporters of the renewal of the Charter from the British South Africa Company and therefore of the present administration of Southern Rhodesia. The second camp favoured moves towards full self-government within the Empire. The election results showed that the supporters of self-government were decisively defeated in every district, although the subsequent byelection in Marandellas did give them a single seat.Results* IncumbentsIn some cases there were differing figures for the electorate given by the Rhodesia Herald and the Bulawayo Chronicle.Note: Gordon Stewart Drummond Forbes was absent during the second session; Burton Ireland Collings and William Beverley Bucknall were absent during the third and fourth sessions; and Herman Melville Hayman was absent during the fourth session.Changes during the assemblyMarandellasJohn McChlery lodged an election petition against the result in Marandellas, and succeeded in establishing that he had actually won. He was declared elected on 5 June 1914.NorthernJohn Arnold Edmonds resigned from the Legislative Council through a letter dated 8 February 1915, and as a result a byelection was held on April 26. Of the two candidates, Robert Garvin did not definitively state a policy on whether Southern Rhodesia should seek immediate self-government or continue with its present administration, while Frederick Eyles was a supporter of self-government.Bulawayo South DistrictGordon Forbes died of wounds received in action on 27 July 1915, and a byelection was held on October 25. George Stewart was a supporter of the present administration while Herbert Longden wanted immediate self-government.Nominated membersThe members nominated by the British South Africa Company were:* Clarkson Henry Tredgold, Attorney-General* Dr Eric Arthur Nobbs PhD BSc FHAS, Director of Agriculture* George Duthie, Director of Education* James Hutchison Kennedy, Master of the High Court* Francis James Newton CVO CMG, Treasurer* Ernest William Sanders Montagu, Secretary for Mines and RoadsJames Donald Mackenzie (Acting Attorney-General) replaced Clarkson Henry Tredgold during his absence, on 4 June 1914 and 8 April 1915. Ernest Charles Baxter (Controller of Customs) temporarily replaced Dr Eric Arthur Nobbs during his absence on 8 April 1915. Percival Donald Leslie Fynn (Acting Treasurer) replaced Francis James Newton temporarily during his absence on 28 April 1916.George Duthie resigned from the Council in 1916 and was replaced by Ernest Charles Baxter, Controller of Customs and Excise, on 31 March 1916. Baxter was temporarily replaced by Percival Donald Leslie Fynn during his absence on 13 April 1917. James Hutchison Kennedy died in February 1916, and was replaced by George Henry Eyre (Postmaster-General) on 14 April 1916. James Donald Mackenzie as Solicitor General replaced Clarkson Henry Tredgold during his absence on 3 May 1918 and 2 May 1919. When Francis James Newton was absent during the sixth session of the Council in 1919, Percival Donald Leslie Fynn (Acting Treasurer) was named to the council on 25 April 1919.References* Source Book of Parliamentary Elections and Referenda in Southern Rhodesia 1898-1962 ed. by F.M.G. Willson (Department of Government, University College of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, Salisbury 1963)* Holders of Administrative and Ministerial Office 1894-1964 by F.M.G. Willson and G.C. Passmore, assisted by Margaret T. Mitchell (Source Book No. 3, Department of Government, University College of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, Salisbury 1966)* Official Year Book of the Colony of Southern Rhodesia, No. 1 - 1924, Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia
4165935
Erik_Reece
Erik Reece is an American writer, the author of two acclaimed books of nonfiction - Lost Mountain: A Year in the Vanishing Wilderness: Radical Strip Mining and the Devastation of Appalacchia (New York: Books, 2006) and An American Gospel: On Family, History, and The Kingdom of God (New York: Books, 2009) - and numerous essays and magazine articles, published in Magazine, Nation, and magazine. He also maintains a blog The Future We Want for True/Slant. He is writer-in-residence at the of Kentucky in Lexington, teaching journalism, writing, and literature. LifeReece was born and raised in Kentucky. He received two degrees from the University of Kentucky, where he studied with Davenport.WorkProseReeces first book-length prose was a companion essay to Guy Davenports collection of his drawings and paintings, A Balance of Quinces. Before that, he published a collection of poems, My Muse Was Supposed to Meet Me Here.Reeces 2006 book Lost Mountain: A Year in the Vanishing Wilderness (New York: Books, 2006), with photos by J. Cox and a foreword by Berry, observes the effects removal mining in Appalachia from October 2003 through November 2004. The book grew out of an essay for Magazine entitled Death of a Mountain: Radical Strip Mining and the Leveling of Appalachia, which was published in the April 2005 edition and which would win the John B. Oakes Award for Distinguished Environmental Journalism from the University Graduate School of Journalism.In 2009, Reece published An American Gospel: On Family, History, and The Kingdom of God (New York: Books, 2009), a book about Reeces upbringing as the son and grandson of Baptist preachers, his fathers suicide, and his own subsequent struggle to find a form of Christianity with which he would feel comfortable  and the guidance he received from the writings of Thomas Jefferson, Walt Whitman and other American geniuses. This book, too, grew out of an essay for Magazine, Jesus Without the Miracles: Thomas Jeffersons Bible and the Gospel of Thomas.PoetryReeces first published book was a collection of poems, My Muse Was Supposed to Meet Me Here.He edited the 2007 anthology Field Work: Modern Poems from Eastern Forests (Lexington, KY: The University of Press of Kentucky, 2007), an anthology of poems about the landscape and ecology of the eastern United States. It includes the work of modern American poets (among them, Frost, Berry, Carruth, Wright) plus that of four classical Chinese poets, who wandered and wrote about an area of southeastern China that is  similar in landscape and ecology to the eastern woodlands of the United States.AwardsIn addition to the John B. Oakes Award for Distinguished Environmental Journalism from the University Graduate School of Journalism, in 2006 Erik Reece received the Clubs R. Brower Award for Environmental Journalism. References *The Future We Want Erik Reeces blog at True/Slant*Erik Reeces website*Lost Mountain website*Erik Reece interview Air with Gross*Erik Reece interview via buzzflash*Reece, Erik. Death of a Mountain: Radical strip mining and the leveling of Appalachia via Harpers Magazine*Reece, Erik (February 9, 2006 27, 2006 issue) Who Killed the Miners? Nation*Reece, Erik (April 3, 2009) Save Jesus, Ignore Easter Controversial On Faith column in Post
4175153
Parkstad_Limburg
Parkstad Limburg is a collaboration between seven municipalities (Heerlen, Kerkrade, Landgraaf, Brunssum, Simpelveld, Voerendaal and Onderbanken). They work together to improve public services, transport and housing on a regional level. This collaboration started in 1999.Land useThe name Parkstad, meaning Park City, is derived from the relative greenness of the towns, 94,17 km2 (53%) of its area used for non-urban purposes. However, only 10% of the area (roughly 17.8 km2) is forest and nature, 42% (roughly 74.96 km2) is used for agriculture. Previously, the area had been known as Mijnstreek or Eastern Mining District, as it was one of the primary mining areas of the Netherlands. See also *Heerlen*Kerkrade*Landgraaf*Brunssum*Simpelveld*Voerendaal*Onderbanken*(Netherlands)*Limburg StadionExternal links* WebsiteLimburgLimburgLimburg
4177646
Betty_Heathfield
Betty Heathfield (30 March 1927, Chesterfield  16 February 2006) was a leading figure in the Miners Wives Support Groups during the miners strike (19841985).Betty Vardy was born to a mining family in Chesterfield. Both her grandfathers had been Derbyshire miners. She excelled at Chesterfield girls high school  the top local grammar school  and won a county scholarship which should have taken her to university. However she left school at 16 for a secretarial job at a local engineering company as her weekly wage was vital for her familys welfare. Leaving school in 1943, in the middle of War II, she joined the local auxiliary fire service, and it was here that she became interested in politics. Her family were characteristic Labour Party people, but at the end of the war the experience of hearing the Communist party leader Pollitt speak at a local meeting persuaded her to join the Communist League. Her path to a radical left wing lifestyle was established and she went on to become a full member of the Communist party. She met her future husband  Heathfield at Chesterfields youth cycling club. He was a left wing radical active in the Labour party and the NUM. They married in 1953, when he was still a working miner and 13 years before he became a full-time NUM official. During the Miners Strike (1984-85), she and Anne Scargill, then wife of Scargill, led the national campaign to help miners families in every pit village in the country. They organised school holiday breaks for children and, with financial aid from other trade unions and street and house-to-house collections, somehow kept alive a flame of hope. She chaired Women Against Pit Closures.  At the end of the strike, she could still organise more than 2,000 miners wives to rally at Chesterfield football ground to demand help for the thousands of families left deprived, some penniless, by the dispute.In 1989, her 36-year-long marriage broke down. She and Peter had been a devoted couple, with four grown-up children. He moved to Worksop to live with Sue Rolstone, whom he married after divorcing Betty in 2001.She picked up on her earlier educational talents and studying for a politics degree at University. At the final stage, however, she fell ill with disease and her last four years were spent in a Chesterfield nursing home. She was survived by her three sons and a daughter.Her papers are located at The Womens Library, London Metropolitan University, Ref# 7BEH.External links*Obituary from Guardian
4183522
Skinningrove
os_grid_reference         NZ711199Skinningrove is a village in the borough of and Cleveland and the county of Yorkshire, England.This name is  Viking influenced and is thought to mean Skinners grove or pit.() The village had a slaughterhouse until recent times. History The village had an agricultural and fishing economy until the opening of local ironstone workings in 1848 initiated an industrialisation boom.  Iron smelting was introduced and a railway built by 1865. A jetty on the coast built in 1880 allowed seagoing vessels to carry heavy cargoes from the area.  Mining continued until 1958 and the iron and steel works continued in production until the 1970s.( Contemporary description The closure of the local industries have caused economic and social problems for the village.(The Cleveland Ironstone Mining Museum (formerly the Tom Leonard Mining Museum) describes the villages mining heritage, providing a unique underground experience and an insight into how 6.2 million tons of ironstone was extracted from Skinningrove.  The village has a large natural sand beach used for recreational fishing and a beck, which occasionally floods, notably in the year 2000.  It also has The Riverside Building  community centre which is on the site of a former school. There is a Methodist Chapel which has services on a Sunday at 18:00.  There is also a fish and chip shop, a community centre and general dealers and post office.  Every year Skinningrove hosts a bonfire and fireworks display which attracts hundreds of people.  Each year the bonfire is on a different theme.The Way runs through the village.(Skinningrove at Digital Village ,  East Cleveland Community Development Group in partnership with the University of Teesside. Accessed 3 Oct 2010) Oarfish On 17 February 2003, a rarely seen oarfish was caught by angler Val Fletcher, using a rod baited with squid.() The fish was 11ft 4in (3.3 metres)long and weighed, 140lb (63.5kg). Graham Hill, the science officer at The Deep, an aquarium in Hull, said that he had never heard of another oarfish being caught off the coast of Britain. The History Museum in London said that it would be interested in preserving the fish in its permanent collection however the fish had been cut up into steaks before any scientists could examine it. References  External links * Skinningrove Bonfire* Skinningrove Digital Village* .pl:Skinningrove
4189740
Plant_defense_against_herbivory
Image:Toxicodendron radicans.jpg|thumb|ivy produces urushiol to protect the plant from herbivores. In humans this chemical produces an allergic skin rash, known as urushiol-induced contact dermatitis.Image:Foxglove2.jpg|thumb|Foxgloves produce several deadly chemicals, namely cardiac and steroidal glycosides. Ingestion can cause nausea, vomiting, hallucinations, convulsions, or death.Plant defense against herbivory or host-plant resistance (HPR) describes a range of adaptations evolved by plants which improve their survival and reproduction by reducing the impact of herbivores.  Plants use several strategies to defend against damage caused by herbivores. Many plants produce metabolites, known as allelochemicals, that influence the behavior, growth, or survival of herbivores. These chemical defenses can act as repellents or toxins to herbivores, or reduce plant digestibility.Other defensive strategies used by plants include escaping or avoiding herbivores in time or in place, for example by growing in a location where plants are not easily found or accessed by herbivores, or by changing seasonal growth patterns. Another approach diverts herbivores toward eating non-essential parts, or enhances the ability of a plant to recover from the damage caused by herbivory. Some plants encourage the presence of natural enemies of herbivores, which in turn protect the plant.  Each type of defense can be either constitutive (always present in the plant), or induced (produced in reaction to damage or stress caused by herbivores).Historically, insects have been the most significant herbivores, and the evolution of land plants is closely associated with the evolution of insects.  While most plant defenses are directed against insects, other defenses have evolved that are aimed at vertebrate herbivores, such as birds and mammals. The study of plant defenses against herbivory is important, not only from an evolutionary view point, but also in the direct impact that these defenses have on agriculture, including human and livestock food sources; as beneficial biological control agents in pest control programs; as well as in the search for plants of medical importance.Evolution of defensive traitsthumb|300px|Timeline of plant evolution and the beginnings of different modes of insect herbivoryThe earliest land plants evolved from aquatic plants around  (Ma) in the Ordovician period. These early land plants had no vascular system and required free water for their reproduction. plants appeared later and their diversification began in the Devonian era (about 400 Ma). Their reduced dependence on water resulted from adaptations such as protective coatings to reduce evaporation from their tissues. Reproduction and dispersal of vascular plants in these dry conditions was achieved through the evolution of specialized seed structures. The diversification of flowering plants (angiosperms) during the Cretaceous period is associated with the sudden burst of speciation in insects.() This diversification of insects represented a major selective force in plant evolution, and led to selection of plants that had defensive adaptations. Early insect herbivores were mandibulate and bit or chewed vegetation; but the evolution of vascular plants lead to the co-evolution of other forms of herbivory, such as sap-sucking, leaf mining, gall forming and nectar-feeding.()Records of herbivoresthumb|Viburnum lesquereuxii leaf with insect damage; Dakota Sandstone (Cretaceous) of Ellsworth County, Kansas. Scale bar is 10 mm.Our understanding of herbivory in geological time comes from three sources: fossilized plants, which may preserve evidence of defense (such as spines), or herbivory-related damage; the observation of plant debris in fossilised animal faeces; and the construction of herbivore mouthparts.()Long thought to be a Mesozoic phenomenon, evidence for herbivory is found almost as soon as fossils which could show it.  Within under 20 million years of the first fossils of sporangia and stems towards the close of the Silurian, around , there is evidence that they were being consumed.() Animals fed on the spores of early Devonian plants, and the chert also provides evidence that organisms fed on plants using a pierce and suck technique.(  Many plants of this time are preserved with spine-like enations, which may have performed a defensive role before being co-opted to develop into leaves.During the ensuing 75 million years, plants evolved a range of more complex organs - from roots to seeds.  There was a gap of 50 to 100 million years between each organ evolving, and it being fed upon.(  Hole feeding and skeletonization are recorded in the early Permian, with surface fluid feeding evolving by the end of that period.(Image:Plain tiger moat.JPG|thumb|A Plain Tiger chrysippus caterpillar making a moat to block defensive chemicals of Calotropis before feedingCo-evolutionHerbivores depend on plants for food, and have evolved mechanisms to obtain this food despite the evolution of a diverse arsenal of plant defenses. adaptations to plant defense have been likened to offensive traits and consist of adaptations that allow increased feeding and use of a host plant.() Relationships between herbivores and their host plants often results in reciprocal evolutionary change, called co-evolution. When a herbivore eats a plant it selects for plants that can mount a defensive response. In cases where this relationship demonstrates specificity (the evolution of each trait is due to the other), and reciprocity (both traits must evolve), the species are thought to have co-evolved.()  The escape and radiation mechanism for co-evolution presents the idea that adaptations in herbivores and their host plants have been the driving force behind speciation,(() and have played a role in the radiation of insect species during the age of angiosperms.() Some herbivores have evolved ways to hijack plant defenses to their own benefit, by sequestering these chemicals and using them to protect themselves from predators.(TypesPlant defenses can be classified generally as constitutive or induced. Constitutive defenses are always present in the plant, while induced defenses are produced or mobilized to the site where a plant is injured. There is wide variation in the composition and concentration of constitutive defenses and these range from mechanical defenses to digestibility reducers and toxins.  Many external mechanical defenses and large quantitative defenses are constitutive, as they require large amounts of resources to produce and difficult to mobilize.()Induced defenses include secondary metabolic products, as well as morphological and physiological changes.() An advantage of inducible, as opposed to constitutive defenses, is that they are only produced when needed, and are therefore potentially less costly, especially when herbivory is variable.(Chemical defensesImage:Diospyros kaki fruit.jpg|thumb|upright|Persimmon, genus Diospyros, has a high tannin content which gives immature fruit, seen above, an astringent and bitter flavor.The evolution of chemical defenses in plants is linked to the emergence of chemical substances that are not involved in the essential photosynthetic and metabolic activities. These substances, metabolites, are organic compounds that are not directly involved in the normal growth, development or reproduction of organisms,() and often produced as by-products during the synthesis of primary metabolic products.() Although these secondary metabolites have been thought to play a major role in defenses against herbivores,((() a meta-analysis of recent relevant studies has suggested that they have either a more minimal (when compared to other non-secondary metabolites, such as primary chemistry and physiology) or more complex involvement in defense.()  Secondary metabolites are often characterized as either qualitative or quantitative. Qualitative metabolites are defined as toxins that interfere with an herbivores metabolism, often by blocking specific biochemical reactions. Qualitative chemicals are present in plants in relatively low concentrations (often less than 2% dry weight), and are not dosage dependent. They are usually small, water soluble molecules, and therefore can be rapidly synthesized, transported and stored with relatively little energy cost to the plant.  Qualitative allelochemicals are usually effective against non-adapted specialists and generalist herbivores.Quantitative chemicals are those that are present in high concentration in plants (5  40% dry weight) and are equally effective against all specialists and generalist herbivores. Most quantitative metabolites are digestibility reducers that make plant walls indigestible to animals.  The effects of quantitative metabolites are dosage dependent and the higher these chemicals proportion in the herbivores diet, the less nutrition the herbivore can gain from ingesting plant tissues. Because they are typically large molecules, these defenses are energetically expensive to produce and maintain, and often take longer to synthesize and transport.()The geranium, for example, produces a unique chemical compound in its petals to defend itself from beetles.  Within 30 minutes of ingestion the chemical paralyzes the herbivore.  While the chemical usually wears off within a few hours, during this time the beetle is often consumed by its own predators.http://www.ars.usda.gov/is/AR/archive/mar10/garden0310.htm*See ToxalbuminTypes of chemical defensesPlants have evolved many secondary metabolites involved in plant defense, which are collectively known as antiherbivory compounds and can be classified into three sub-groups: nitrogen compounds (including alkaloids, cyanogenic glycosides and glucosinolates), terpenoids, and phenolics.()Alkaloids are derived from various acids. Over 3000 known alkaloids exist, examples include nicotine, caffeine, morphine, colchicine, ergolines, strychnine, and quinine.() Alkaloids have pharmacological effects on humans and other animals. Some alkaloids can inhibit or activate enzymes, or alter carbohydrate and fat storage by inhibiting the formation phosphodiester bonds involved in their breakdown.() Certain alkaloids bind to acids and can inhibit synthesis of proteins and affect repair mechanisms. Alkaloids can also affect membrane and cytoskeletal structure causing the cells to weaken, collapse, or leak, and can affect nerve transmission.() Although alkaloids act on a diversity of metabolic systems in humans and other animals, they almost uniformly invoke an aversively bitter taste.()glycosides are stored in inactive forms in plant vacuoles. They become toxic when herbivores eat the plant and break cell membranes allowing the glycosides to come into contact with enzymes in the cytoplasm releasing cyanide which blocks cellular respiration.(Toxicon Volume 38, Issue 1,    January 2000,   Pages 11-36    Jnos Vetter Plant cyanogenic glycosides       doi:10.1016/S0041-0101(99)00128-2) Glucosinolates are activated in much the same way as cyanogenic glucosides, and the products can cause gastroenteritis, salivation, diarrhea, and irritation of the mouth.(The terpenoids, sometimes referred to as isoprenoids, are organic chemicals similar to terpenes, derived from five-carbon isoprene units.  There are over 10,000 known types of terpenoids.() Most are multicyclic structures which differ from one another in both functional groups, and in basic carbon skeletons.()  Monoterpenoids, continuing 2 isoprene units, are volatile oils such as citronella, limonene, menthol, camphor, and pinene. Diterpenoids, 4 isoprene units, are widely distributed in latex and resins, and can be quite toxic. Diterpenes are responsible for making Rhododendron leaves poisonous. Plant steroids and sterols are also produced from terpenoid precursors, including D, glycosides (such as digitalis) and saponins (which lyse blood cells of herbivores).()Phenolics, sometimes called phenols, consist of an aromatic 6-carbon ring bonded to a hydroxy group. Some phenols have antiseptic properties, while others disrupt endocrine activity. Phenolics range from simple tannins to the more complex flavonoids that give plants much of their red, blue, yellow, and white pigments. Complex phenolics called polyphenols are capable of producing many different types of effects on humans, including antioxidant properties. Some examples of phenolics used for defense in plants are: lignin, silymarin and cannabinoids.() Condensed tannins, polymers composed of 2 to 50 (or more) flavonoid molecules, inhibit herbivore digestion  by binding to consumed plant proteins and making them more difficult for animals to digest, and by interfering with protein absorption and enzymes.() Silica and lignins, which are completely indigestible to animals, grind down mandibles (appendages necessary for feeding).In addition to the three larger groups of substances mentioned above, acid derivates, acids and even peptides() are used as defense. The cholinergic toxine, cicutoxin of hemlock, is an polyyne derived from the fatty acid metabolism.() -N-Oxalyl-L-,-diaminopropionic acid as simple amino acid is used by the pea which leads also to intoxication in humans.() The synthesis of fluoroacetate in several plants is an example for the use of small molecules to disturb the metabolism of the herbivore, in this case the acid cycle.()Mechanical defensesImage:Raspberry cane - closeup in winter - P.2005.03.jpg|thumb|The thorns on the stem of this raspberry plant, serve as a mechanical defense against herbivory.Plants have many external structural defenses that discourage herbivory.()  Depending on the herbivores physical characteristics (i.e. size and defensive armor), plant structural defenses on stems and leaves can deter, injure, or kill the grazer.  Some defensive compounds are produced internally but are released onto the plants surface; for example, resins, lignins, silica, and wax cover the epidermis of plants and alter the texture of the plant tissue. The leaves of holly plants, for instance, are very smooth and slippery making feeding difficult. Some plants produce gummosis or sap that traps insects.A plants leaves and stem may be covered with sharp prickles, spines, thorns, or trichomes- hairs on the leaf often with barbs, sometimes containing irritants or poisons. Plant structural features like spines and thorns reduce feeding by large ungulate herbivores (e.g. kudu, impala, and goats) by restricting the herbivores feeding rate, or by wearing down the molars as in pears.() The structure of a plant, its branching and leaf arrangement may also be evolved to reduce herbivore impact. The shrubs of New Zealand have evolved special wide branching adaptations believed to be a response to browsing birds such as the moas.() Similarly, African Acacias have long spines low in the canopy, but very short spines high in the canopy, which is comparatively safe from herbivores such as giraffes.()() Image:Koeh-187.jpg|thumb|palms protect their fruit by surrounding it with multiple layers of armor.Trees such as coconut and other palms, may protect their fruit by multiple layers of armor, needing efficient tools to break through to the seed contents, and special skills to climb the tall and relatively smooth trunk.ThigmonastyThigmonastic movements, those that occur in response to touch, are used as a defense in some plants. The leaves of the plant, Mimosa pudica, close up rapidly in response to direct touch, vibration, or even electrical and thermal stimuli. The cause of this mechanical response is an abrupt change in the turgor pressure in the pulvini at the base of leaves resulting from osmotic phenomena. This is then spread via both electrical and chemical means through the plant; only a single leaflet need be disturbed.(This response lowers the surface area available to herbivores, which are presented with the underside of each leaflet, and results in a wilted appearance. It may also physically dislodge small herbivores, such as insects.Mimicry and camouflageSome plants mimic the presence of insect eggs on their leaves, dissuading insect species from laying their eggs there. Because female butterflies are less likely to lay their eggs on plants that already have butterfly eggs, some species of neotropical vines of the genus Passiflora (Passion flowers) contain physical structures resembling the yellow eggs of Heliconius butterflies on their leaves,  which discourage oviposition by butterflies.()Indirect defensesImage:Acacia-collinsii.jpg|thumb|The large thorn-like stipules of collinsii are hollow and afford shelter for ants, which in return protect the plant against herbivores.Another category of plant defenses are those features that indirectly protect the plant by enhancing the probability of attracting the natural enemies of herbivores. Such an arrangement is known as mutualism, in this case of the enemy of my enemy variety. One such feature are semiochemicals, given off by plants. Semiochemicals are a group of organic compounds involved in interactions between organisms.  One group of semiochemicals are allelochemicals; consisting of allomones, which play a defensive role in communication, and kairomones, which are used by members of higher levels to locate food sources. When a plant is attacked it releases allelochemics containing an abnormal ratio of volatiles.()()  Predators sense these volatiles as food cues, attracting them to the damaged plant, and to feeding herbivores. The subsequent reduction in the number of herbivores confers a fitness benefit to the plant and demonstrates the indirect defensive capabilities of semiochemicals.  Induced volatiles also have drawbacks, however; some studies have suggested that these volatiles also attract herbivores.(Plants also provide housing and food items for natural enemies of herbivores, known as biotic defense mechanisms, as a means to maintain their presence.  For example, trees from the genus Macaranga have adapted their thin stem walls to create ideal housing for an ant species (genus  Crematogaster), which, in turn, protects the plant from herbivores.()  In addition to providing housing, the plant also provides the ant with its exclusive food source; from the food bodies produced by the plant.  Similarly, some Acacia tree species have developed thorns that are swollen at the base, forming a hollowing structure that acts as housing.  These Acacia trees also produce nectar in nectaries on their leaves as food for the ants.()use of endophytic fungi in defense is a very common phenomenon. Most plants have endophytes, microbial organisms that live within them. While some cause disease, others protect plants from herbivores and pathogenic microbes. Endophytes can help the plant by producing toxins harmful to other organisms that would attack the plant, such as alkaloid producing fungi which are common in grasses such as fescue (Festuca arundinacea).()Leaf shedding and colorThere have been suggestions that leaf shedding may be a response that provides protection against diseases and certain kinds of pests such as miners and gall forming insects.() Other responses such as the change of leaf colors prior to fall have also been suggested as adaptations that may help undermine the camouflage of herbivores.() leaf color has also been suggested to act as an honest warning signal of defensive commitment towards insect pests that migrate to the trees in autumn.()()Costs and benefitsDefensive structures and chemicals are costly as they require resources that could otherwise be used by plants to maximize growth and reproduction. Many models have been proposed to explore how and why some plants make this investment in defenses against herbivores.Optimal defense hypothesisThe optimal defense hypothesis attempts to explain how the kinds of defenses a particular plant might use reflect the threats each individual plant faces.()  This model considers three main factors, namely: risk of attack, value of the plant part, and the cost of defense.()()The first factor determining optimal defense is risk: how likely is it that a plant or certain plant parts will be attacked? This is also related to the plant apparency hypothesis, which states that a plant will invest heavily in broadly effective defenses when the plant is easily found by herbivores.()  Examples of apparent plants that produce generalized protections include long-living trees, shrubs, and perennial grasses.( Unapparent plants, such as short-lived plants of early successional stages, on the other hand, preferentially invest in small amounts of qualitative toxins that are effective against all but the most specialized herbivores.(The second factor is the value of protection: would the plant be less able to survive and reproduce after removal of part of its structure by a herbivore?  Not all plant parts are of equal evolutionary value, thus valuable parts contain more defenses.  A plants stage of development at the time of feeding also affects the resulting change in fitness. Experimentally, the fitness value of a plant structure is determined by removing that part of the plant and observing the effect.() In general, reproductive parts are not as easily replaced as vegetative parts, terminal leaves have greater value than basal leaves, and the loss of plant parts mid-season has a greater negative effect on fitness than removal at the beginning or end of the season.()() Seeds in particular tend to be very well protected. For example, the seeds of many edible fruits and nuts contain cyanogenic glycosides such as amygdalin. This results from the need to balance the effort needed to make the fruit attractive to animal dispersers while ensuring that the seeds are not destroyed by the animal.()()The final consideration is cost: how much will a particular defensive strategy cost a plant in energy and materials?  This is particularly important, as energy spent on defense cannot be used for other functions, such as reproduction and growth. The optimal defense hypothesis predicts that plants will allocate more energy towards defense when the benefits of protection outweigh the costs, specifically in situations where there is high herbivore pressure.()Carbon:nutrient balance hypothesisThe carbon:nutrient balance hypothesis, also known as the environmental constraint hypothesis, states that the various types of plant defenses are responses to variations in the levels of nutrients in the environment.()()  This hypothesis predicts the Carbon/Nitrogen ratio in plants determines which secondary metabolites will be synthesized. For example, plants growing in nitrogen-poor soils will use carbon-based defenses (mostly digestibility reducers), while those growing in low-carbon environments (such as shady conditions) are more likely to produce nitrogen-based toxins. The hypothesis further predicts that plants can change their defenses in response to changes in nutrients. For example, if plants are grown in low-nitrogen conditions, then these plants will implement a defensive strategy composed of constitutive carbon-based defenses.  If nutrient levels subsequently increase, by for example the addition of fertilizers, these carbon-based defenses will decrease.Growth rate hypothesisThe growth rate hypothesis, also known as the resource availability hypothesis, states that defense strategies are determined by the inherent growth rate of the plant, which is in turn determined by the resources available to the plant. A major assumption is that available resources are the factor in determining the maximum growth rate of a plant species. This model predicts that the level of defense investment will increase as the potential of growth decreases.() Additionally, plants in resource-poor areas, with inherently slow-growth rates, tend to have long-lived leaves and twigs, and the loss of plant appendages may result in a loss of scarce and valuable nutrients.()A recent test of this model involved a reciprocal transplants of seedlings of 20 species of trees between clay soils (nutrient rich) and white sand (nutrient poor) to determine whether trade-offs between growth rate and defenses restrict species to one habitat.  Seedlings originating from the nutrient-poor sand had higher levels of constitutive carbon-based defenses, but when they were transplanted into nutrient-rich clay soils, they experienced higher mortality from herbivory. These finding suggest that defensive strategies limit the habitats of some plants.()Growth-differentiation balance hypothesisThe growth-differentiation balance hypothesis states that plant defenses are a result of a tradeoff between growth-related processes and differentiation-related processes in different environments.() Differentiation-related processes are defined as processes that enhance the structure or function of existing cells (i.e. maturation and specialization).( A plant will produce chemical defenses only when energy is available from photosynthesis, and plants with the highest concentrations of secondary metabolites are the ones with an intermediate level of available resources.( The GDBH also accounts for tradeoffs between growth and defense over a resource availability gradient.  In situations where resources (e.g. water and nutrients) limit photosynthesis, carbon supply is predicted to limit both growth and defense.  As resource availability increases, the requirements needed to support photosynthesis are met, allowing for accumulation of carbohydrate in tissues.  As resources are not sufficient to meet the large demands of growth, these carbon compounds can instead be partitioned into the synthesis of carbon based secondary metabolites (phenolics, tannins, etc.).  In environments where the resource demands for growth are met, carbon is allocated to rapidly dividing meristems (high sink strength) at the expense of secondary metabolism.  Thus rapidly growing plants are predicted to contain lower levels of secondary metabolites and vice versa.  In addition, the tradeoff predicted by the GDBH may change over time, as evidenced by a recent study on Salix spp.  Much support for this hypothesis is present in the literature, and some scientists consider the GDBH the most mature of the plant defense hypotheses. Importance to humans  Agriculture The variation of plant susceptibility to pests was probably known even in the early stages of agriculture in humans. In historic times, the observation of such variations in susceptibility have provided solutions for major socio-economic problems. The grape phylloxera was introduced from North America to France in 1860 and in 25 years it destroyed nearly a third (100,000 km) of the French grape yards. Valentine Riley noted that the American species labrusca was resistant to Phylloxera. Riley, with J. E. Planchon, helped save the wine industry by suggesting the grafting of the susceptible but high quality grapes onto Vitis labrusca root stocks.()The formal study of plant resistance to herbivory was first covered extensively in 1951 by Reginald (R.H.) Painter, who is widely regarded as the founder of this area of research, in his book Plant Resistance to Insects.() While this work pioneered further research in the US, the work of Chesnokov was the basis of further research in the USSR.()Fresh growth of grass is sometimes high in acid content and can cause poisoning of grazing livestock. The production of cyanogenic chemicals in grasses is primarily a defense against herbivores.()()The human innovation of cooking may have been particularly helpful in overcoming many of the defensive chemicals of plants. Many inhibitors in grains and pulses, such as trypsin inhibitors prevalent in pulse crops, are denatured by cooking, making them digestible.()()It has been known since the late 17th century that plants contain noxious chemicals which are avoided by insects. These chemicals have been used by man as early insecticides; in 1690 nicotine was extracted from tobacco and used as a contact insecticide.  In 1773, insect infested plants were treated with nicotine fumigation by heating tobacco and blowing the smoke over the plants.() The flowers of Chrysanthemum species contain pyrethrin which is a potent insecticide. In later years, the applications of plant resistance became an important area of research in agriculture and breeding, particularly because they can serve as a safe and low-cost alternative to the use of pesticides.() The important role of secondary plant substances in plant defense  was described in the late 1950s by Dethier and G.S. Fraenkel.(() The use of botanical pesticides is widespread and notable examples include Azadirachtin from the neem (Azadirachta indica), d-Limonene from Citrus species, Rotenone from Derris, Capsaicin from Pepper and Pyrethrum.()Natural materials found in the environment also induce plant resistance as well.()  Chitosan derived from chitin induce a plants natural defense response against pathogens, diseases and insects including nematodes, both are  approved as an biopesticide by the EPA to reduce the dependence on toxic pesticides.The selective breeding of crop plants often involves selection against the plants intrinsic resistance strategies. This makes crop plant varieties particularly susceptible to pests unlike their wild relatives. In breeding for host-plant resistance, it is often the wild relatives that provide the source of resistance genes. These genes are incorporated using conventional approaches to plant breeding, but have also been augmented by recombinant techniques, which allow introduction of genes from completely unrelated organisms. The most famous transgenic approach is the introduction of genes from the bacterial species, thuringiensis, into plants. The bacterium produces proteins that, when ingested, kill lepidopteran caterpillars. The gene encoding for these highly toxic proteins, when introduced into the host plant genome, confers resistance against caterpillars, when the same toxic proteins are produced within the plant. This approach is controversial, however, due to the possibility of ecological and toxicological side effects.() Pharmaceutical Image:Mandragora Tacuinum Sanitatis.jpg|thumb|upright|Illustration from the 15th century manuscript Sanitatis detailing the beneficial and harmful properties of Mandrakes.Many currently available pharmaceuticals are derived from the secondary metabolites plants use to protect themselves from herbivores, including opium, aspirin, cocaine, and atropine.() These chemicals have evolved to affect the biochemistry of insects in very specific ways. However, many of these biochemical pathways are conserved in vertebrates, including humans, and the chemicals act on human biochemistry in ways similar to that of insects. It has therefore been suggested that the study of plant-insect interactions may help in bioprospecting.()There is evidence that humans began using plant alkaloids in medical preparations as early as 3000 B.C.( Although the active components of most medicinal plants have been isolated only recently (beginning in the early 19th century) these substances have been used as drugs throughout the human history in potions, medicines, teas and as poisons. For example, to combat herbivory by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species, Cinchona trees produce a variety of alkaloids, the most familiar of which is quinine. Quinine is extremely bitter, making the bark of the tree quite unpalatable, it is also an anti-fever agent, known as bark, and is especially useful in treating malaria.()Throughout history mandrakes (Mandragora officinarum) have been highly sought after for their reputed aphrodisiac properties. However, the roots of the mandrake plant also contain large quantities of the alkaloid scopolamine, which, at high doses, acts as a nervous system depressant, and makes the plant highly toxic to herbivores. Scopolamine was later found to be medicinal use in pain management before and during labor; in smaller doses it is used to prevent sickness.() One of the most well-known medicinally valuable terpenes is an anticancer drug, taxol, isolated from the bark of the yew, Taxus brevifolia, in the early 1960s.()Biological pest controlRepellent planting, defensive live fencing hedges, and obstructive-repellent interplanting, with host-plant resistance species as beneficial biological control agents is a technique in pest control programs for: gardening, gardening, gardening, and landscaping; in farming and agriculture; and in ecology methods for habitat restoration projects.See also*signal#Other alarm signals*Aposematism*ecology*Canavanine*(botany)*Laticifer*Lectin*of repellent plants*of pest-regulating plants*of beneficial weeds*of companion plants*Raphide*disease resistance*Pollination*Phytoalexin*plant movement*predationReferencesFurther references** Hartley, Sue (2010) The 300 Million Years War: Plant Biomass v Herbivores Royal Institution Christmas Lecture.*Howe, H. F., and L. C. Westley. 1988. Ecological relationships of plants and animals. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.*****External links*Bruce A. Kimball Evolutionary Plant Defense Strategies Life Histories and Contributions to Future Generations*Plant Defense Systems & Medicinal Botany*Herbivore Defenses of Senecio viscosus L.de defensa de les plantes contra els herbvorsAbwehr von Herbivorenvan planten tegen herbivorenvegetais contra a herbivoria
4196788
ardak
 website  ardak Municipality  Prefecture of ardakardak is a town and a district of Province of Turkey. It is situated on the road from Denizli to Ankara near the banks of the Acgl.  Denizlis airport (Airport) is in ardak.A very notable sight in the town is the caravanserai of Hanabad, built in the 13th century by the local ruler Esedddin Ayaz during the reign of Seljuk sultan Keykubad I. It bears typical characteristics of Seljuk caravanserais and on its stones are carved fish, cow and human relics.  A small village until the early years of the Republic, ardak started growing as of 1958 when it was made into a district. Streets and buildings are well arranged and it is a tidy little town. The economy centers around agriculture as well as mining of sulfate reserves in Acgl whose name means, literally and appropriately, the bitter lake. Services rendered to the airport are also taking an increasingly important share in the towns economy. Hanabad Caravanserai is presently in phase of being restored.  See also* Airport* Acglcbk-zam:ardak(Denizli)eo:ardak(Denizli)sw:ardakmrj:ms:ardakDenizli
4206153
The_Secret_of_Sinharat
The Secret of Sinharat is a fiction novel by Brackett set on the planet Mars, whose protagonist is John Stark.Plot summaryFor the first seven chapters, Queen of the Martian Catacombs and The Secret of Sinharat are almost word-for-word identical; the differences are inconsequential to the plot. In Chapter 1, a brief paragraph is inserted to situate the reader in the Brackett Solar System and to excuse the presence of non-Terran humans on planets like Mars through the concept of a prehistoric seeding - not mentioned elsewhere in Bracketts novels. In Chapter 5, an explicit reference to the events of Bracketts story The Beast-Jewel of Mars (Planet Stories, Winter 1948) has been cut, perhaps on the assumption that readers of the novel would not know or be interested in the earlier story. The Arabic word khamsin is consistently replaced by storm wind, perhaps on the grounds that readers might not be familiar with the word (or mistake it for a Martian technical term).*Chapter 1 - Eric John Stark, fleeing from Venus where he has been running guns to native opponents of a Terro-Venusian mining concern (mining and mineral extraction companies recur as villains in Bracketts stories), has come to Mars to fight as a mercenary in a private war in the Martian Drylands on behalf of Delgaun, lord of the Martian city of Valkis. He is finally pinned down by agents of Earth Police Control. Their leader, Simon Ashton, offers him a deal: lifting of his sentence, if he agrees to act as a spy on Delgaun, whom Ashton claims is plotting a major war together with a barbarian leader called Kynon, of the Dryland tribe of Shun; a war that Ashton says will be disastrous for the drylanders. Stark agrees to go to Valkis as Ashtons agent, and return to report to him in the Martian city of Tarak.*Chapter 2 - Stark enters Valkis late at night and sees the drylanders gathering there. He meets Delgaun and several other mercenaries that Delgaun has hired. One of them is Luhar, an old enemy of Stark from Venus. They challenge each other, but Delgaun separates them. At dawn, Kynon of Shun enters Valkis.*Chapter 3 - Delgaun, Stark and the mercenaries go to see Kynon. In the public square of Valkis, Kynon demonstrates a technology which he claims to have recovered from the lost secrets of the Ramas, an ancient race of Martians who had acquired a form of immortality. Kynon, using two crystal circlets and a glowing rod, appears to transfer the consciousness of an old Martian man into a young Terran boy. The old man collapses and dies. Kynon returns with Delgaun and the others to the council room in the palace.*Chapter 4 - Stark accuses Kynon of an elaborate charade in which the boy was coached in his part and the old man was killed by poison. Kynon admits it, but justifies it as a necessity for uniting the drylanders against the City-States of the Dryland Borders, who are depriving them of water resources. Together with the men of Valkis and the other Low-canal cities, they will conquer the City-States and become fully independent of Terra. Stark goes to his quarters and sleeps through the day. At dusk he goes to the council-room, and finds Delgaun there with Kynons female companion, Berild. Delgaun asks Stark to bring back one of Kynons trusted captains, Freka, who is indulging in a certain vice; he needs to be back before Kynon sets out at midnight for his desert headquarters. On his way, Stark is stopped by Fianna, Berilds serving girl, who warns him that he is going into a trap set by Delgaun. Stark accepts the warning, but continues anyway.*Chapter 5 - Stark comes to Kalas, a broken-down dive in a mostly uninhabited part of Valkis. He finds Freka there, indulging in shanga, a radiation-induced temporary atavistic regression to a bestial state. Stark realizes that an empty room near Freka probably contains the trap set for him. When he is refused entrance to the room, he leaves Kalas and waits outside. He is followed by Luhar, who had been waiting in the empty room for a chance to attack Stark. Stark jumps Luhar; the fighting goes back into Kalas, where the shanga addicts and Kala herself become involved. Stark knocks Freka out, is stabbed by Luhar, knocks Luhar out, and returns with Freka to Delgauns palace. Delgaun is surprised and angry; Berild is pleased.*Chapter 6 - At midnight, Kynon leaves Valkis with the drylanders and mercenaries. Kynon orders Stark and Luhar to remain apart from each other. Delgaun remains behind. Luhar and Freka confer. The caravan proceeds across the desert for three days, and on the fourth day they are hit by a sandstorm.*Chapter 7 - Luhar and Freka take advantage of the storm to jump Stark and leave him for dead. He finds himself together with Berild. When the storm blows out, they are lost in the desert. They proceed on foot. After four days, running out of water, they come to a wilderness of rocks.From chapter 8 on the two versions diverge.Queen of the Martian Catacombs*Chapter 8 - Stark and Berild are dying of thirst. Berild leads Stark three miles out of their way to a ruined monastery. She miraculously discovers a long-buried well. After they have drunk and slept, Stark suggests to Berild that she is actually a surviving immortal Rama, and knew the location of the well from memory. Berild dismisses the accusation. They stay in the ruins two days, and then leave.*Chapter 9 - Stark and Berild arrive at Sinharat, the old city of the Ramas, where Kynon has made his headquarters. They find Kynons army and his mercenaries camped in the desert outside the city. Stark enters Sinharat looking for Luhar, and fatally attacks him when he finds him. Delgaun is also mysteriously there. Kynon arrests Stark and places him in a subterranean cell in Sinharat under Frekas guard. Before Freka can kill Stark, Fianna appears and shoots him. Stark disposes of Freka in a pit in the catacombs. Fianna explains that Delgaun and Berild are both Ramas, and that while Kynon wants empire, Delgaun and Berild want to control Mars - without Kynon - through their mercenary outlander clients.*Chapter 10 - Stark and Fianna proceed to a crypt below Sinharat where Berild is waiting. Kynon is there with her, but drugged and under Berilds hypnotic control. Berild offers to become Starks lover and to make him a Rama, by exchanging his mind with Kynons, and disposing of Delgaun after the war. Stark agrees, and Berild produces the real crowns of the Ramas, and puts them on Starks and Kynons heads.*Chapter 11 - Stark awakes to find himself in Kynons body. His own body is still there, alive but with Kynons mind still under hypnosis. Berild locks Kynon, in Starks body, in a small cell. Stark-as-Kynon goes with Berild to address the armies assembled at Sinharat from a high ledge in the city. Delgaun is there. Instead of leading them to war, Stark reveals the charade of the false Rama crowns. Berild stabs Stark in the back. Stark reveals Berilds treachery to Delgaun. Delgaun throws Berild from the ledge and attempts to unseat Stark from his steed and flee. Stark, though wounded, grasps Delgaun and throttles him, while Delgaun stabs him repeatedly. Stark kills Delgaun and loses consciousness. Fianna runs to him.*Chapter 12 - Stark awakes and finds himself with Fianna. He is back in the crypt below Sinharat, in his own body. Kynon is next to him, dead. Fianna reveals that she is also a Rama, unknown to Berild and Delgaun. She expresses remorse for her past evil and destroys the rod and crowns of the Ramas. Stark and Fianna leave together and find Sinharat deserted. Fianna decides to stay in Sinharat for a while before she decides what to do. Stark departs for Tarak to meet Simon Ashton.The Secret of Sinharat*Chapter 8 - Stark and Berild are dying of thirst. Berild leads Stark three miles out of their way to an old ruin, where they both collapse. At night, Stark wakes to see Berild tracing her steps to the site of a long-buried well. They uncover it together, drink, and sleep. The next night, Stark suggests to Berild that she must be a witch to have discovered the well. Berild explains that she knew the secret of the wells location from her father, who had crossed the desert in this place years ago. Stark accepts her explanation, but is privately unconvinced. They stay in the ruins two days, and then leave.*Chapter 9 - Stark and Berild arrive at Sinharat at dawn and find Kynons caravan encamped outside. The Dryland armies have not yet arrived, but only Kynon and his mercenaries are in the city itself, which the drylanders regard as taboo. Stark and Berild enter Sinharat looking for Luhar, but Kynon prevents Stark and Luhar from fighting. Berild kills Luhar with a knife. Kynon does not punish Berild, but warns Stark not to fight with Freka, who has gone back to the desert, and condemns the infighting that threatens his plans. Berild lies to Kynon about how she and Stark reached Sinharat, pretending that they had more water than they did. Kynon dismisses Berild and Stark.*Chapter 10 - Stark awakes at dusk and finds Fianna there. She warns him that his life is in danger from Delgaun, when he arrives. Stark refuses to flee. Fianna leads Stark to a chamber where Berild is waiting. She warns him against Delgaun, and expresses her resentment at Kynon. Drums beat announcing the late arrival of Delgaun and his allies to Sinharat, and Stark and Berild part. As Stark leaves, he meets Fianna, who hints that Berild may be a Rama.*Chapter 11 - Kynon unveils the banner of the Ramas before the massed armies of the Drylands and the Low-canals in front of Sinharat. Stark confronts Delgaun as a fellow-follower of Kynon, and forces Delgaun to accept him as comrade-in-arms. Later, in council, Delgaun backs down before Kynon, and they proceed to plot the conquest of the City-States. Kynon warns his confederates not to reveal that they do not really have the secret of the Ramas. Days pass. Freka returns from Shun with more fighters, but Kynon keeps him and Stark from fighting. Later, Stark goes into Sinharat and finds Berild reading an ancient wall-inscription in an unknown language. Stark follows her as she goes to a high window.*Chapter 12 - Stark accuses Berild of being a Rama. Berild dismisses his statement with smooth explanations, but Stark does not accept them. Stark deduces that Delgaun must also be a Rama. Berild leaves suddenly. Stark goes later, and is attacked by Freka who is under the influence of shanga. As they are fighting, Kynon and his fighters discover them. Stark is accused of murdering Freka, and the Shunni demand his blood. Stark is knocked out as he tries to blurt out the truth of Kynons charade. He awakes in an underground cell, guarded by a Shunni warrior. (This portion of the expansion is a rewrite of the middle of Chapter 9 of Catacombs.)*Chapter 13 - Fianna appears, shoots the Shunni, and frees Stark. Fianna reveals that she, Berild, and Delgaun are all surviving Ramas, though she is dependent upon them for the Sending-on of Minds. She leads him into the catacombs, where Stark disposes of the guards body in a pit and takes his sword. Fianna describes Delgaun and Berilds plans for empire, and explains that they intend to dispose of Kynon by putting Delgauns mind into Kynons body. She asks Stark to help her prevent it, and leads him to Berilds chamber. There they find Kynon in bonds, and Berild preparing the real crowns of the Ramas for the Sending-on of Minds.*Chapter 14 - Stark enters, attacks Delgaun and kills him with the sword. Berild drops the crowns and draws a knife. Fianna frees Kynon, who throttles Berild as she slashes him. Stark tells the wounded Kynon to stop the march of the Drylanders. He and Fianna help Kynon out to the open stairway that leads up to Sinharat. From there, Kynon addresses the tribes, telling them of Delgaun and Berilds treachery and his own lie about having the secret of the Ramas. Then he collapses and dies. The mercenaries and the armies break up and leave. Stark returns to Sinharat and finds Fianna. She explains that she has hidden the crowns of the Ramas, unable to destroy them. She invites Stark to return to Sinharat late in his life, offering to make him a Rama then. He refuses. Fianna says that she will stay in Sinharat. Stark departs for Tarak to meet Simon Ashton, looking back at Sinharat as he goes.Expansion CommentaryThe Sinharat expansion is very competently and intelligently written and very much in the mature Brackett style. The characters of Kynon and Fianna are given additional depth. Whereas in Catacombs Kynon was merely a villain and a tool of Delgaun and Berild, in Sinharat he is more intelligent and even tragic. Fiannas breaking of the crowns of the Ramas in Catacombs is a somewhat trite development; her awareness of her own weakness, and her thought for the future in Sinharat is both more tragic and more realistic, and this turn of events gives Starks last look back at Sinharat an additional meaning that it had not had in Catacombs. The plot structure is enhanced by the delay in Starks discovery that Berild is a Rama, and the awkward though necessary appearance of Delgaun is better handled in Sinharat. The inconsistency in Catacombs, whereby Fianna is a Rama unknown to anyone but herself, but (being in a very young body) must have undergone the Sending on of Minds very recently, is eliminated in Sinharat. Additional details about the layout of Sinharat are consistent with Bracketts late story The Road to Sinharat (1963).Characters*John Stark, an outlaw mercenary warrior, born on Mercury, acting as a double agent.*Simon Ashton, an official of Earth Police Control, searching for Stark.*Delgaun of Valkis, lord of the wickedest of the Low-canal cities, hiring mercenaries to serve in a war in the Drylands.*Luhar, cashiered officer of the Venusian Guards, with a deadly grudge against Stark*Kynon of Shun, a Martian dryland barbarian with dreams of uniting the desert tribes and establishing an empire over the City-States of Mars.*Freka, a captain loyal to Kynon, but addicted to the terrible vice of shanga.*Berild, a red-haired Shunni woman, consort of Kynon, but actually using him to further her plans and Delgauns.*Fianna, Berilds servant girl, possessed of wisdom and cunning far beyond her years.*The Ramas, an ancient and evil Martian nation, who had discovered the secret of immortality - at a terrible price, to be paid by others.Publication historyThis story was first published under the title Queen of the Martian Catacombs in the magazine Stories, Summer 1949.In 1964, after considerable revision and expansion, it was republished as The Secret of Sinharat as one part of an Ace Double novel; its companion was another expanded Eric John Stark story, of the Talisman. The expansion has sometimes been attributed to Bracketts husband, Hamiltonhttp://www.sff.net/people/richard.horton/aced15.htm. For The Secret of Sinharat, there is little internal evidence to support this suggestion.In 1982, it appeared, again together with People of the Talisman, under the title Eric John Stark, Outlaw of Mars.In 2005 the original Planet Stories version was republished in Sea-Kings of Mars and Otherworldly Stories, Volume 46 in the Gollancz Masterworks series. It appeared the same year in the collection Stark and the Star Kings (Haffner Press).In 2008, the entire Eric John Stark saga was republished, in E-Book form, by Baen Publishing, and is available thru Webscriptions.net.TitlesQueen of the Martian Catacombs is typical of the rather wordy and often misleading titles assigned to stories in Stories, to go along with their colorful, action-packed, but equally misleading cover art. The cover of the Summer 1949 issue of Planet Stories gives the title as Queen of the Martian Catacombs: A Desert-worlds Novel by Leigh Brackett, with the explanatory blurb Across the red sands fought the Terran changeling to reach Berild, beautiful and fey - and blast her into eternal dust.... This is not a very accurate synopsis of the story.The catacombs in question are the tunnels under Sinharat, although they do not play a very important part in either version of the story, and the Queen is apparently Berild, though her role is not really central enough to name the story after her. Planet, however, liked cover illustrations of beautiful women, and the Allen Anderson cover of the Summer 1949 issue indeed shows a red-haired woman in blue dress and high heels (!) astride a Martian steed resembling a frightened cartoon seahorse. An inappropriately pale-skinned Stark is shown in the foreground attempting to split the skull of a crouching, red-skinned Martian (?) with his swordboth sword and red Martian existing only in the illustrators imagination. An architecturally banal Martian city languishes in the background, while the vivid yellow sky boasts over a dozen moons.The later title, The Secret of Sinharat, is less irrelevant; the secret is presumably the Ramas secret method of mind-transference, and although it hardly belongs exclusively to the city of Sinharat, that citys prominent place as the setting for the storys climax is sufficiently important to make its use in the title not inappropriate.FootnotesReferences*External links*
4214688
HNoMS_Uller_(1876)
{|Ship notesShip notesShip notesShip notes|}HNoMS Uller was a Vale-class gunboat constructed for the Norwegian Navy at Karljohansverns Verft Naval Yard in Horten in 1874-1876 and had yard build number 55.( She was one of a class of five gunboats - the other ships in the class were Vale, Brage, Nor and Vidar.Uller was, in addition to the heavy, muzzle-loading main gun, armed with a small Quick Fire gun and an early automatic gun, similar to the gun.Later Uller and her sister ships were rebuilt as minelayers, and she served in this role when the Germans invaded 9 April 1940.The invasionCaptureWhen the Germans attacked, Uller was mining the sea lanes to Bergen, and was taken by surprise by the German forces. SinkingAfter being pressed into Kriegsmarine service Uller and fellow captured minelayer HNoMS Tyr were mining the entrance to the still Norwegian-held Sognefjorden on 1 May 1940 when they were first bombed unsuccessfully by two Norwegian Navy Air Service Flyvebaatfabrikk M.F.11 maritime reconnaissance aircraft of the Sognefjord Air Group and then attacked again later the same day by a He 115 of the same unit. In the second attack Uller was hit by a bomb, beached and then scuttled by Tyr.NotesBibliography* * External links* Naval history via Flix: KNM Vale, retrieved 27 Feb 2006 * Ships of the Norwegian navy, retrieved 27 Feb 2006 Uller (1876)
4218250
Khutsong
Khutsong is a township on the Rand of Africa, and scene of widespread unrest since February 2006. It is situated close to the town of Carletonville http://www.merafong.co.za/history.htm, in the City Local Municipality of the Gauteng province.RiotsFollowing the abolition of cross-border municipalities, the entire Merafong City Local Municipality which includes Khutsong, was transferred from the Rand District Municipality in Province to the District Municipality in the North West Province. The residents of Khutsong objected to the transfer from wealthy Gauteng to the poorer North West. Only 123 votes were cast in the local government elections held on 1 March 2006.Actions taken by residents included an application to the High Court http://www.sabcnews.com/south_africa/general/0,2172,122333,00.html and violent incidents, including petrol bombing the homes of National Congress candidates,(http://www.mg.co.za/articlePage.aspx?articleid265243&area/insight/insight__national/), blocking roads (http://www.iol.co.za/index.php?set_id1&click_id13&art_idvn20060223070405364C394320) and the destruction of municipal property.One important element in the Khutsong issue relates to environmental security. The Khutsong community is physically located alongside some of the richest gold mines in the world. Recent research conducted by the Water Research Commission in South Africa has shown that heavy metal and radionuclide contamination is closely associated with rivers and wetlands downstream of major mining operations. The Khutsong community is located in such an aquatic ecosystem, so the environmental dimension to this conflict is an important and largely unexplored one. On 27 April 2007 when President Mbeki was celebrating Freedom Day at Bhisho renewed riots reminiscent of those which occurred in Soweto on 16 June 1976 took place in the streets of Khutsong.On 4 December 2008 it was announced that Khutsong and the rest of the Merafong Municipality would be reintegrated into the Gauteng Province http://www.sabcnews.co.za/portal/site/SABCNews/menuitem.5c4f8fe7ee929f602ea12ea1674daeb9/?vgnextoidf0c6c4622920e110VgnVCM10000077d4ea9bRCRD&vgnextfmtdefault&channelPathPolitics%20%3E%3E%20Province. The passage of the Sixteenth Amendment to the of South Africa, altering the provincial boundaries accordingly, came into effect on 3 April 2009.See also* COSATU* SACP* African municipal election, 2006Notes and referencesExternal links*Inkatha Freedom Party - Mbeki must intervene at Khutsong*Gauteng government page on Khutsong*Government Notice on transfer of Merafong City Local Municipality*Merafong City Local Municipality page*Google News Link on Khutsongwar:Khutsong
4228758
Metal_Warriors
input  padMetal Warriors is a game developed by LucasArts in 1995 for the Super NES and published by Konami. Overview Metal Warriors is about the United government in the year 2102 being under siege from Dark Axis led by the leader Venkar Amon. The few remaining warriors defending Earth would be known as the Metal Warriors.After successfully completing a few missions in space: rescuing a pilot, gathering intelligence, defending a ship and capturing a mining facility, the United government disables an anti-spacecraft cannon in the Alaska in order to safely begin removing Axis forces from earth. Missions on Earth include assaulting a facility in the jungle, fighting through bombed out cities and capturing subterranean mining facilities. Finally, the player confronts Amon and defeats him in a battle between fully mobile flying armored suits. Gameplay Much of the game mechanics fall inline with a game.  On top of the regular single player game, the addition of a 2 player split screen versus mode was ahead of its time and added value to the title.  Most notably each selectable robot has their own melee weapons in the game.The gameplay mechanics and level design are very similar to Suits Valken/Cybernator, but this game is not a sequel to Cybernator as many users tend to believe.Cybernator and Metal Warriors are completely different games made by different companies.The confusion comes from the fact of Konami being the publisher of both games for the US.The game notably made use of each of the Super Nintendos buttons:  The D-Pad would move the players mech, L would activate power-ups, Select would eject the pilot/enter a mech, Start paused the game, R would activate defenses, Y was the basic ranged weapon, A was the melee weapon, B was movement, and X was tied to a unique ability.  (This was not the case for the Drache.) Mecha/Assault Suits One of the features that set this game apart from other mecha-themed shooters was that of multiple assault suits.  The player was able to pilot six different types of assault suits, and could even use different suits in the same stage.  While other shooters forced the player to remain in their vehicle at all times, this was not the case with Metal Warriors.  At any time, the player could abandon their assault suit and attempt to find a new one, allowing the player to remain in the game even if their assault suit was destroyed.  Instead of a health bar, the mechs all showed progressive battle damage as they took on enemy fire, like denting, loss of the suits arms, and finally death.All six mechs were unique in their form and function.Nitro:  The first assault suit the player is introduced to is the Nitro. The Nitro was the basic mech of the in-game armed forces.  The primary weapon of the Nitro was a plasma rifle capable of sustained automatic fire.  The melee weapon consisted of an energy-blade similar to the famed lightsaber.  For defense, the Nitro was able to produce an energy shield that would protect it from incoming fire. It could also drop smaller versions of this shield that would hover in mid-air; these absorb a small amount of damage before dissipating, but damage enemies on contact. The greatest asset of the Nitro was perhaps the jet-pack, which gave it long-term flight capability. While the plasma rifle was an accurate and potent ranged weapon, the energy-blade was much more destructive in terms of raw power. The Nitro is a general purpose mech, well-suited for all types of combat. Its  mobility and versatility helped make up for its lighter armor.Havoc: The Havoc is similar to the Nitro, but appears to be an older model in the storyline of the game. While similar, the mechs have different weapons and equipment. The Havoc was armed with a projectile-firing, belt-fed assault rifle. Although this weapon had a faster rate of fire than the Nitros plasma rifle, it was less powerful and far less accurate. The close-combat weapon of the Havoc was a bladed chain-weapon that had excellent range and could be swung with a fair degree of speed. Although lacking a jet-pack, the Havocs feet were equipped with rocket-driven jumpjets, which allowed it speed across the ground or take to the air in a boost-assisted jump.  Jumping in general was handled with the B button; the placement of the X and B buttons made boost-jumps a challenging prospect. Defensive measures were provided by a simple but effective ballistic shield.  The Havoc was clearly designed for shock-assaults, and while not as mobile or advanced as the Nitro, the Havoc bore arguably heavier armor.Prometheus:  The Prometheus assault suit was little more than a walking gun; it is slow, yet powerful. A pair of tank-sized battle cannons sat upon the shoulders of the burly assault suit. The pilot could fire the weapon and allow the solid shell to impact with the target, or they could airburst the round, causing a multi-directional explosion of shrapnel (this was frighteningly effective in conjunction with the rubber bullet power-up). Close quarter combat was handled by an onboard flamethrower that was capable of covering mech-sized targets in a bath of fire, a swift death if the opponent was unable to move away. The Prometheus was also able to deploy floater mines which would discourage aerial targets. Because this walking tank could not jump, fly, or sprint, it was an easy target and therefore equipped with an energy shield that offered 360 degrees of protection, as well as the games best armor (at full health, the Prometheus was capable of surviving two fully charged blasts from the Balls fusion cannon). Although not as mobile as other suits, the Promethus carried a bridge-layer, which would allow it to cross chasms.Spider:  An advanced reconnaissance assault suit, the Spider looked much like its namesake.  Bearing six mechanical legs, the Spider was able to traverse almost any terrain, including vertical walls and cliff faces. The Spider was even capable of hanging from the ceiling. The primary ranged weapon was fired by the gun drone, a small robotic entity that hovered over the assault suit. It fired a plasma-based weapon similar to that of the Nitro. When an enemy grew close, the drone became a melee weapon by smashing into the opponent. The Spider also had a web-shooting weapon capable of paralyzing opponents. The Spider had a visually unique shield system that acted as an active-camouflage cloaking field to hide from opponents. While the cloaking portion of this ability was useless in multiplayer mode, as a result of the games split-screen display, this shield also worked to reduce incoming damage from bullets to the Spider. Although able to jump, the Spider had no hover capability, but its wall-walking and fast rate of movement made up for this in skilled hands.Ballistic: The Ballistic assault suit was odd in that it is both highly mobile and completely immobile. By collapsing its frame into a sphere, the Ballistic was able to speed across terrain at break-neck speeds, but in order to fire its weapons, the mech had to deploy stabilizers, effectively pinning it to the ground. The main weapon was a high-caliber machine gun.  Secondary fire was supplied in the form of fusion cannon. The fusion cannon was actually more destructive than the machine gun, but needed to be charged up in order to be used. The pilot could charge for a short time and fire a burst of smaller bolts, or store the energy and unleash a massive blast that was capable of wiping out almost any target in a single shot. Armored plates served as a shield against incoming fire, and while the Ballistic mech lacked a melee weapon, it didnt necessarily need one. By rolling into a sphere, the assault suit could rotate in place to store up energy and then smash itself into the enemy. The Ball could also jump while in movement mode.Drache:  Considered to be the pinnacle of military technology, the Drache was a highly mobile aerial assault suit. Except for landing, the Drache was incapable of operating on the ground. In terms of offense, the Drache really only had two weapons. The main weapon was a rapid-fire plasma gun that was capable of firing in any direction (the direction of fire was determined by the button(s) pressed), making the Drache useful against both ground and air targets. While effective, this weapon was nothing when compared to the Drache itself. By folding inward, the Drache could dive-bomb enemy targets. While diving, the Drache was protected by an energy shield in addition to being driven by boosters. The resultant effect of the speeding Drache colliding with an enemy was devastating. Despite the lack of equipment, the Drache was extremely mobile, so the pilot was expected to make good use of that feature.In addition, while ejected from the suit, the player controlled a marine equipped with a pistol and jetpack. The player could fly in a manner similar to the nitro; but was understandably slower. The pistol was useless against all enemies with the exception of soldiers and scientists lacking armor. Fortunately, most enemies would ignore the player when controlling the marine. The primary purpose of ejecting from armor was either to find/switch armor, or to activate switches to open doors. Exploration was also possible because the marine could fit into smaller spaces and scout ahead without attracting the attention of most enemies.See also* Core* Mission* Suit Zeta Gundam* CybernatorReferences(External linksWarriors
4236742
1900_in_New_Zealand
IncumbentsRegal and Vice Regal*of State  Victoria*Governor  The Earl of Ranfurly GCMG (Statistics New Zealand: New Zealand Official Yearbook, 1990. ISSN 0078-0170 page 52)Government and lawThe 14th New Zealand Parliament continued. Government was*Speaker of the House  Sir ORorke*Prime Minister  Seddon*Minister of Finance  Seddon*Chief Justice  Sir StoutParliamentary opposition* Leader of the Opposition  William Russell, (Independent).()Main centre leaders*of Auckland  Goldie*of Wellington  John Aitken*of Christchurch  Louisson, Reece*of Dunedin  Robert Chisholm Events *15 January: The Zealand Mounted Rifles rout a Boer assault at Slingersfontein, South Africa.* 9 February: Opening of the Wanganui Opera House by premier Richard Seddon.(nzhistory.net.nz)*15 February: New Zealand troops are part of the relief of Kimberley, South Africa.*3 May: Holy Cross College, Mosgiel (Roman Catholic seminary) established.* May: Phosphate discovered on Nauru  mining begins later in the year.* MayJune: Tour of Pacific islands by Prime Minister Seddon. Tonga, Niue, Fiji and the Cook Islands are visited.*28 September: The New Zealand Government votes to incorporate the Islands into New Zealand.* October: The number of European electorates in the New Zealand Parliament is increased to 76.* 23 October: The countrys first electric tram service begins, between Roslyn and Hill in Dunedin.;Unknown date*Lands Administration Act passed.*George Hemmings brings the first motor car into the Island.*The General Assembly Library (part of the Zealand Parliament Buildings) is built.*18 people die in a boating tragedy on the River.Arts and literatureSee in art, in literature,  1900 booksMusicSee: in musicFilm*Whitehouses The Departure of the Second Contingent for the Boer War  the oldest surviving New Zealand film  premieres.Appointments and awards*Primate of New Zealand  Garden Cowie (Bishop of Auckland)*Bishop of Christchurch  Julius*Bishop of Dunedin  Tarratt Nevill*Bishop of Nelson  Oliver Mules*Bishop of Waiapu  Leonard Williams*Bishop of Wellington  WallisSportAthleticsNational champions (Men):*100 yards  G. Smith (Auckland)*250 yards  G. Smith (Auckland)*440 yards  W Strickland (Hawkes Bay)*880 yards  J Lynskey (Canterbury)*1 mile  W Simpson (Canterbury)*3 miles  W Simpson (Canterbury)*120 yards hurdles  G. Smith (Auckland)*440 yards hurdles  G. Smith (Auckland)*Long jump  Rangi Hroa (Otago)*High jump  C Laurie (Auckland)*Pole vault  C Laurie (Auckland)*Shot put  W Madill (Auckland)*Hammer throw  W Madill (Auckland)BadmintonThe first club is formed, in Auckland, but soon goes into recess.(Todd, S. (1976) Sporting Records of New Zealand. Auckland: Moa Publications. ISBN 0-908570-00-7) (see also 1927)ChessNational Champion: W.E. Mason of Wellington.(List of New Zealand Chess Champions)Cricket* See New Zealand cricket season*A tour of New Zealand by Australias Cricket Club included seven matches, of which the visitors won six with one match drawn.*Six provincial matches were played during the 18991900 domestic season, all of them over two or three days, with wins by Otago over Hawkes Bay and Canterbury, by Wellington and Auckland over Otago, and by Canterbury and Auckland over Wellington.* Scores were uniformly low by modern standards, mostly below 200, with only two centuries scored and only one team total of over 300 runs: the highest team total was 464 by Wellington against Otago, with centuries by F A Midlane (149) and C A Richardson (113), and the best bowling figures were A D Downes 743 for Otago against Canterbury.GolfThe 8th National Amateur Championships were held in Otago ()* Men: Arthur Duncan (Wellington)  2nd title* Women: K Rattray (Otago)  3rd titleHorse racingHarness racing* Trotting Cup: Cob  (Auckland Trotting cup at hrnz.co.nz)Thoroughbred racing*Zealand Cup winner: Fulmen Ideal*Zealand Derby winner: Renown*Cup winner: Blue Jacket*Cup winner: Djin Djin*Top New Zealand stakes earner: Advance*Leading flat jockey: C Jenkins (50 wins)Polo*Savile Cup winners: Oroua (A Strang, J Strang, W Strang, O Robinson)Rowing*Mens national champions (coxed fours): Picton*Mens national champions (coxless pairs): Wellington*Mens national champions (double sculls): Canterbury*Mens national champions (single sculls): T Spencer (Wellington)Rugby UnionProvincial club rugby champions include: City (Auckland); Westport (Buller); Christchurch (Canterbury); Pirates (Hawkes Bay); Levin (Horowhenua); Awarua (Marlborough); Alhambra (Otago); Gisborne (Poverty Bay); Hawera (Taranaki); Kaierau (Wanganui); Melrose (Wellington); winners of Bush, Nelson, and Wairarapa club competitions unknown.:see also Rugby union in New ZealandSoccerProvincial league champions:()*	Auckland:	Grafton AFC (Auckland)*	Otago:	Roslyn Dunedin*	Wellington:	Diamond WellingtonSwimmingNational champions (Men):*100 yards frestyle  held, but winners name not recorded*220 yards frestyle  held, but winners name not recorded*440 yards frestyle  held, but winners name not recordedTennisNew Zealand championships:*Mens singles: J Hooper*Womens singles: K Nunneley*Mens doubles: C Cox/J Collins*Womens doubles: K Nunneley/E HarmanReferences: Romanos, J. (2001) New Zealand Sporting Records and Lists. Auckland: Hodder Moa Beckett.Births*4 January: Richdale, ornithologist*19 January: Clarence Skinner, politician, deputy Prime Minister (in Australia)*4 February: Wodzicki*22 February: Willetts*24 February: Syme*26 February: Deem*13 March: Donald*25 March: Harris*27 April: Cleary*4 May: McIndoe, plastic surgeon*8 May: William McCaskill*23 May: Harper*3 June: Sansom*3 June: Anderson McPherson*9 June: Hargrave Taylor*4 July: Hayward, filmmaker* 27 July (as Nina Betts): Byron, silent film actrss, dancer.*20 July: Scott*10 August: Porritt*11 August: Astor*1 September: McDowall*3 September: Stevens*7 September: Allan*7 September: Sipos*17 September: Weitzel*22 September: Ah Kew*22 September: Schramm*23 September: Alwyn Warren*14 October: McLeod, cricketer*19 October: Coubray*20 October: Muir*21 October: Pope* 3 November (in Durham, England): Blunt, cricketer*5 November: James*12 November: Graham*16 November: Cronin*24 December: KeihaDeaths* date unknown: Rangitahau* 3 February: Pulman* 3 March: Halcombe* 22 March: Gustav Schmitt* 28 April: Innes* May: Tapu* 26 May: Ulrich* 28 September: Patuki* 4 October: Skey* 26 October: Seffern* 29 December (approximately): BrohamSee also*of years in New Zealand*of New Zealand history*of New Zealand*history of New Zealand*of environmental history of New Zealand*of New Zealands links with AntarcticaFor world events and topics in 1900 not specifically related to New Zealand see: 1900References(External links  
4242660
Magma_(Jonathan_Darque)
Magma (Jonathan Darque) is a character, a supervillain from Comics.  He first appeared in Team-Up vol. 1 #110, as an enemy of Spider-Man and Man.Fictional character biographyJonathan Darque was the executive officer of a mining company investigating new and cheap sources of energy. His investigations were opposed by environmental activists, who held demonstrations at his trial bore sites. His wife died in a car crash when attempting to evade the activists blockade. Darque used his engineering skills to design a battle suit allowing him to become Magma.  He then developed an underground crime organization.Darque/Magma created a device he called the Long Range Sonic Stata Scanner (LRSSS), which enabled him to discover the epicentres of earthquakes before they erupted. He also used the machine to generate waves causing earthquakes; this enabled him to blackmail the Mayor of New York City. (At the publication time of this story, the historical Mayor was Koch). Magma held a press conference to reveal his plans. Spider-Man and Man joined forces to drill down vertically to reach the source of the earthquake, where they discovered his hidden base. After Magma was defeated by Spider-Man and Iron Man in a battle on the surface, he escaped in a pod into the middle of the Ocean.  Spider-Man aimed the LRSSS at this location and Magma was engulfed by the resultant waves and he disappeared into the depths of the ocean.()Magma was eventually arrested after several attempts to take over Stark Industries and some battles on the surface with Jim Rhodes in the Iron Man armor.Subsequently Darque was paid by Oil Company and offered a job to lead a secret research laboratory located in the middle of a mountain, part of the Appalachians in Virginia. With the unwilling assistance of idiot savant Seth Hanks, a local boy, Darque attempted to develop a new electron projector that would allow powerful beams to be directed at Earth from a satellite. Spider-Man saved his colleague, the child and his mother from Magmas base and, accidentally, caused the collapse of the cave destroying the laboratory.(of Spider-Man vol. 1, #16-17)His final fight was with the Torch in Brooklyn, where the Four members fire proved to be greater than the fire resistance of Magmas metal body. The fire melted Magmas equipment, and the asphalt under his feet, meaning that he was unable to continue the fight.Powers and abilitiesMagmas body armor was strong enough to survive a freefall from a ten-story building and was able to withstand 1200 degrees Celsius (the temperature of the magma under the Earths crust). His armor was also able to protect him from intense nuclear radiation. Magma wore a spiked vest made of the same material as his armor. In addition, Magma had a blast gun implanted in his right arm that was able to fire balls of lava, which were created by a generator worn on his back.ReferencesExternal links*(Jonathan Darque)
4243426
Environmental_issues_in_Thailand
File:Forest fire mae hong son province 01.jpg|thumb|380px|Forest fire in Hong Son Province, March 2010The government of Thailand has been focusing on the social and economic development of the country for the past 35 years. However, since Thailand introduced the Seventh Economic and Social development plan (1992-19996) (),protecting the environment become one of the top priorities for the Thailand government. Seventh Economic and Social development plan seeks to maintain economic growth and achieve sustainable growth and stability, especially in the petrochemical,engineering,electronics and basic industries(). Over the past few decades, Thailands dramatic economic growth brought about new environmental challenges in the once-agrarian economy. The country presently faces problems with air and pollution, declining wildlife populations, deforestation, erosion, water scarcity, and waste issues. According to the 2004 indicator, cost of air and water pollution for the country scales up to approximately 1.6% - 2.6% of her GDP per year. () As such, Thailands economic growth has not come short of producing externalities to the society. DeforestationIn the past, forest cover in Thailand has been greatly reduced as people convert forested land for agriculture, such as slash-and-burn agriculture. For example, forest cover fell drastically from 53% in 1961 to 25% in 1998; and more rice fields and urban sprawls have been converted from what was originally wetlands.() With a government measure in place to prohibit logging, deforestation rates have dropped. However, the impacts of deforestation, such as erosion, are still being felt.()Further, deforestation is creating other environmental problems as well. These problems include conversions to dry lands, sedimentation of rivers, and loss of natural habitats. In the fisheries sector, over-harvesting of marine fisheries has reduced fishing yields by 90 percent, and coastal areas have been seriously degraded by expansion of capture fishing, shrimp aquaculture, industry and tourism. This caused much of Thailands biodiversity losses. ()Air pollutionthumb|right|Motorcycles at the Nana intersection, BangkokFile:Burning mountains Thailand.JPG|thumb|Every year the mountain forests of Northern Thailand are set on fire by Thai farmers during the hot dry season to increase the yield of the expensive fungus hygrometricusIndustrial growth has created high levels of air pollution in Thailand. Vehicles and factories contribute to air pollution, particularly in Bangkok.()In the Bangkok metropolitan area, which consists of the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration (BMA) and the four surrounding provinces (Nonthaburi, Pathum Thani, Nakhon Pathom, and Samut Prakan), holds about 20 percent of the national population and over half of the countrys factories. Coupled with the concentration of the factories in the metropolitan area, the air pollution caused by motor vehicle emissions, and grave water pollution from household and industrial wastewater, justified that there would be no doubt of the escalation of externalities from production. Further, due to a lack of treatment facilities, the increasing volumes of hazardous substances generated by the thriving industrial activities have caused serious dumping issues. Unless treatment facilities are built and institutions starts to regulate strictly, environmental contamination caused by hazardous waste threatens to become Thailands worst environmental problem in the future.()Sources of air pollution* Vehicles &mdash; motorcycles make up around 75% of the vehicles on the road in Thailand; diesel trucks and buses also contribute many pollutants.* Industry &mdash; Bangkok and the rest of the Central Region contribute between 60 and 70 percent of the countrys industrial emissions.* Power plants &mdash; most energy production relies on burning of fuels* Agricultural burning* Garbage burning* Open cooking* Forest fires Burning in southeast Asia often creates a haze. In 2003 Thailand ratified the Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution to reduce the haze from forest fires, but issues throughout the region are still common.()The Pollution Control Department and other agencies have developed standards and reduced air pollution from most sources. The standards focus shifting to lower-emission vehicle engines, improving public transportation, and requiring factories and power plants to reduce emissions. In most areas of the country, air pollutants are now within acceptable levels according to national standards. Water resourcesthumb|left|Industrial water pollutionThe most critical environmental problem that Thailand is facing presently, is the water pollution.() Despite the annual southwest monsoon, Thailand is subject to drought, particularly the northeastern region.() As of 2002, Thailand had less available water per person than any other country in Asia, and nearly one third of its water was unsuitable for human consumption.() Unconsumable water was also a result of increasing untreated domestic sewage, industrial wastewater and solid hazardous wastes. ()Like air pollution, water pollution is most serious in the populous Central Region, with high levels of industrial and domestic wastewater. The depletion of the table around Bangkok has led to land subsidence. Coastal waters also face challenges. The of Thailand is primarily polluted by domestic wastewater, and further by waste from industry and tourism. In addition to the Gulf, high pollution levels were found at the mouths of the Chao Phraya, Tha Chin, Pak Panang, Pattani and Ranong rivers. Coastal water quality in most areas, however, are within acceptable standards. Water pollution has become obvious in many areas. In 1997, hundreds of thousands of fish and other aquatic life in the Phong River died as a result of industrial river pollution.() Large amounts of arsenic were found in the groundwater in the Si Thammarat province, a result of mining industry in the area.() Pollution affects the marine environment. Red tides, caused by excessive algae growth and a result of pollution, oil spills, and invasive species are some of the factors that are affecting Thailands marine biodiversity. ()Another major pollution is the heavy metals that have seeped into the rivers of Thailand for many years. In Chao Phraya estuary, mercury levels have far exceeded the normal standards, and such high concentration of heavy metal on the river bed poses a serious threat to ecosystems.()Health effectsWater pollution results in typhoid, dysentery, hepatitis, trachoma, hookworm infection and diarrhea. In 1999, hospitalization rates were:* Typhoid &mdash; 4,000 hospitalizations* Dysentery &mdash; 7,000* Diarrhea &mdash; 95,000Exposure to toxins and heavy metals in water causes disease, liver cancer and defects. Klity Creek in Kanchanaburi province was found to carry dangerous levels of lead from a lead separation plant upstream. Lead levels are apparently the cause of many cases of Syndrome in village children, unidentified illnesses in adults, and many cattle deaths. In 1998, the plant was closed and the creek dredged, although by 2000 lead levels were still considered unsafe.Improvement effortsIn 1992, the government passed several pieces of legislation to prevent water pollution; the laws primarily limit industrial water contamination:* Enhancement and Conservation of National Environment Quality Act (NEQA) of 1992* Factories Act of 1992* Navigation in Thai Waterways Act (Volume 14 ) as amended in 1992* Public Health Act of 1992* Cleanliness and Tidiness of the Country Act of 1992The government continues to invest in wastewater treatment plants. In 2000, enough treated water was available to support 29% of the population, with more treatment plants under construction; upon completion, treated water would be able to support 65% of the population. The most common water treatment techniques are inexpensive to build and maintain, including oxidation ditches, aerated lagoons and stabilization ponds. The government is also investigating more effective and modern techniques such as wetlands.Wildlifethumb|right|Asian elephantsThailands wildlife is threatened by poaching, habitat loss, and an industry that sells wild animals as pets.() The elephant is Thailands national symbol. Although there were 100,000 elephants in Thailand a century ago, the population of elephants in the wild has dropped to an estimated 2,000.() Poachers have long hunted elephants for ivory, meat and hides. Young elephants are often captured for use in tourist attractions or as work animals, although their use has declined since the government banned logging in 1989. There are now more elephants in captivity than in the wild, and environmental activists claim that elephants in captivity are often mistreated.()Poaching of protected species remains a major problem. Hunters have decimated the populations of tigers, leopards and other large cats for their valuable pelts. Many animals (including tigers, bears, crocodiles and cobras) are farmed or hunted for their meat, which is considered a delicacy, and for their supposed medicinal properties. Although such trade is illegal, the famous Bangkok market Chatuchak is still known for the sale of endangered species.() The practice of keeping wild animals as pets threatens several species. Baby animals are typically captured and sold, which often requires killing the mother. Once in captivity and out of their natural habitat, many pets die or fail to reproduce. Affected populations include the black bear, sun bear, white-handed lar, gibbon and binturong.( Large-scale deforestation and development have encroached on many former wildlife habitats, and pesticides in their food supply has reduced bird populations. Several species of sawfish are listed as endangered because of loss and overfishing.() Wildlife conservationConservation efforts by the government include:()* 1960 Wild Animal Reservation and Protection Act* 1961 National Park Act* 1964 National Forest Reserve Act* 1989 Logging ban in natural forests* 1992 Forest Plantation Act* 1992 Enhancement and Conservation of National Environmental Quality Act* 1992 Wild Animals Reservation and Protection Act (WARPA), which forbids or restricts the hunting, breeding, possession, and trade of fifteen reserved animal species and two classes of protected speciesUntil the acts of 1989 - 1992, conservation policies were difficult to enforce, and often took a back seat to economic development.() These acts represented a major shift in Thai policy, and are part of the governments cooperation with the  Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), an international wildlife protection agreement. The government now requires that at least 15% of its land area be protected as forest, and 22% is currently protected as wildlife sanctuaries or parks. To enforce CITES, the government also maintains border checkpoints to prevent animal smuggling, and works to educate the public about wildlife preservation. Thailands Buddhist culture, with its emphasis on respect for all life, has become a key component of the countrys conservation efforts.(Actions TakenMinistry of Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE) arranged activities for the World Environment Day in order to educate and stimulate people to realize the importance and value of biodiversity on world ecosystem and economy. ()Currently, there are MOI agencies that will tackle these environmental issues.; including the Department of Industrial Works who will  watch on the levels of pollutions in Thailand and assess the need for licensing. The Office of Industrial Environment Management is responsible for the treatment of hazardous. There is a hazardous waste treatment facility in Bangkok and a landfill in Ratchaburi. ()See also*Laos earthquakeReferences
4252586
Iridion_3D
EU September 21, 2001()| genre  Shooter| modes  player|ratings  ESRB: Everyone| platforms  Boy Advance| media  GBA cartridge| requirements | input }}Iridion 3D is a quasi-3D rail shooter game developed by Shinen. A title for the Boy Advance portable game console,() it was released in North America on May 29, 2001 and in Europe on September 21 the same year. Influenced by the 64 game Uridium, the game features a single starship fighting the alien Iridion, who have attacked Earth. Iridion spans seven levels from Earth to the aliens home planet, each with a fixed linear path that ends with a boss. Iridion began development as a shooter for the Boy Color; when Shinen decided to drop development and shift their focus to the Game Boy Advance, Iridion was the first game by the developer to appear on the system. Though billed as a 3D game, Shinen used realtime encoding and resizing to manipulate the size of 2D sprites instead of creating a true 3D environment. More room on the game cartridge was available for graphics due to the games use of the GAX Sound Engine, which allowed real-time decoding of song data in a small file size.On release Iridion garnered generally poor reviews. The graphics and sound were generally praised; even a year after its release, critics at TechTV considered it the best-looking game on the platform. In contrast, critics derided the games repetitive and frustrating gameplay. Despite lukewarm reception to the title upon release, Iridion 3D influenced future Shinen shooters such as II and Nanostray.Gameplaythumb|left|Bosses such as the Refusor usually have a single vulnerability&mdash;here, the green core. From top left, the number of lives remaining, score, and ship energy are shown.The game is a simple forward-scrolling rail shooter, similar to the Star Fox series. Only the Game Boy Advances pad, A, and Start buttons are used during gameplay.() The ship remains locked at a set speed and cannot brake or speed up.The player encounters more than fifteen types of enemy, not including level bosses.() Some are easy to destroy; others, including the fire creatures found on the Iridion home world, are indestructible and must be avoided. Other enemies prevent the player from dodging enemy fire by laying mines to block paths. Passive objects, such as garbage or asteroids, can damage or destroy the players craft. Enemies vary in armor and weaponry&mdash;some cannot return fire but travel in waves to ram the player.Each level has the player follow a linear path through waves of enemies and culminates with a boss. In boss stages the players craft does not move forward, but hovers in front of the boss.( Each boss has a single vulnerability which flashes when hit. These areas are often heavily shielded and must be hit repeatedly to remove armor. Other bosses vulnerabilities are hidden and appear for only short periods. Most bosses have weapons that fire upon the player or reflect the players shots. At the end of each level, players receive bonuses for defeated enemies, lives remaining, and the energy level of the players craft.() An extra life is granted if the score reaches certain thresholds.()Iridion 3D features five types of weapons, with three levels of power each. Players boost weapon power by collecting powerups of the color that matches the current weapon. Collecting a different color gives the player the first level of that weapon type. If the players ship is destroyed the power level of the weapon is reduced by one. Each weapon has advantages and disadvantages. The player starts with the red weapon, which is relatively weak but fires rapidly in a large spread. Green weapons are inaccurate but fill the screen with shots. Purple weapons spin in a counterclockwise motion slowly and are fairly strong. Yellow torpedo-like weapons are very powerful but powerups are rare and the weapon fires slowly. Blue weapons, a more powerful version of Yellow weapons, are found only on the last level. Flashing powerups restore the crafts shields.()PlotIn the opening cinematic of Iridion 3D Earth is attacked without warning by the Iridion, who take over much of the surface and lay mines in orbit and bombs in the Pacific Ocean. The player is the pilot of an experimental SHN fighter, the last hope for defending Earth from the Iridion.() The player pilots his ship alone against hordes of Iridion fighters and natural obstacles. The early stages begin on Earth, with the player fighting through an Iridion garbage tunnel. The player proceeds to the Ocean and destroys much of the Iridion invasion fleet on Earth before heading into the stratosphere to destroy the orbital blockade around Earth and subsequently annihilating the Iridion boss at the Moon.With the invasion fleet in ruins, the player heads into the far reaches of space. After destroying an Iridion mining colony within an belt, the player proceeds into the Iridion home system. Eventually the player fights the Iridion on their home world, destroying the Iridion mainframe and ending the alien threat forever.()DevelopmentIridion started development as a shooter for the Boy Color; on January 10, 2001, Shinen announced they would stop making games for the Color, instead working on games exclusively for the Game Boy Advance.() Iridions executive producer was Dan Kitchen,() a former programmer for Atari. Iridion 3D was Shinens first product to utilize the GAX Sound Engine, which allowed real-time decoding of song data in an extremely small file size; this allowed more space on the cartridge to be used for graphics.()Although advertised as a 3D game, Iridion 3D uses solely 2D graphics for texture scrolling and sprites which depict explosions and enemies. The developers create the illusion of 3D by looping background textures&mdash;a graphically intensive technique for the Game Boy Advance.( Graphical objects shrink or enlarge to depict position relative to the player. Level environments feature changes such as progression from day to night. Kitchen, Majescos president of handhelds, wrote that by pushing the graphics hardware of the Game Boy Advance to its technical limits, Iridion 3D provides a truly realistic 3D gaming experience. He hoped that players will be amazed that such smooth environments and intense gameplay can now be achieved on a portable system.(By March 2001, the GBA version of Iridion was shown in workable form. IGN saw early screens and declared that Iridion was aiming to set the standard what GBA shooters should be... Set the standard with a hail of bullets. They felt Shinen was pushing the Game Boy Advance to its limits, producing the most stunning game seen at the time for the handheld system.() GameSpots Ben Stahl previewed Iridion 3D on March 21, 2001, shortly before the release of the game in the United States.() He noted the excellent graphics and high rate, ending with At this point, Iridion 3D looks like it could be a great game for fans of the genre.(ReceptionDespite praise for its graphics and sound, Iridion 3D was received poorly by critics; the game received 53% and 57% ratings on review aggregate web sites Metacritic and Rankings, respectively.((The graphics were almost universally praised. Andrew Bub of GameSpy asserted that Nintendo should have used Iridion to advertise the Game Boy Advance, as it took full advantage of the systems power.() A year after its release, TechTVs Miguel Concepcion argued it was still the best-looking game for the system.( Miguel Lopez of GameSpot lauded the graphics, writing that while its ultimately all smoke and mirrors, Iridions world is richly detailed, has remarkable depth, and is unbelievably fluid. Its often hard to tell if the games backgrounds are composed of streaming motion video or just some really fancy math-powered 2D bitmaps.(In contrast to praise for Iridions graphics, its actual gameplay was generally panned. IGNs Craig Harris wrote that Shinens shooter for the Game Boy Advance will impress with all its effects, but thats about it. He noted that the player is limited to shooting and dodging, making gameplay repetitive. Harris and Concepcion complained that on a small screen distances are hard to judge; the players ship is hit by bullets that appear to be in the distance.(( Bub and Informers Jay Fitzloff criticized the craft placement, as the players view was often obscured by their own ship.(() Lopez also gave Iridion low marks, warning that after the initial wow wears off, youll be stuck with an empty experience.() Edge observed that Iridion is a sweet number that will entertain, if only for a week or so.() Allgames Skyler Miller said Iridion 3D was nothing more than a demo and awarded it two out of five stars.( A more positive review came from GamePro, whose reviewer summed up his experience by writing that if youre looking for some classic shooter action on your new GBA, Iridion 3D will fit the bill nicely without blowing you away.()Positive comments were usually directed at sound; WiredLounge.com said that The soundtrack is an instant classic, maybe even one of the best shooter scores ever.() Concepcion noted that the games mood-fitting high energy techno was an oddity coming from a German game company.() Despite poor reviews, Shinens Manfred Linzner felt that Iridion 3D was the best game for the Game Boy Advance without licensed characters.()See also*in video gamingReferencesExternal links*Official site3D
4257914
Carthage_Senior_High_School_(Carthage,_Missouri)
Carthage Senior High Schoolthumb|center|260px|Carthage High SchoolCurrent PrincipalKandy FrazierSchool typePublicReligious affiliationNoneFounded1848Opened1904 (current facility)LocationCarthage, Missouri USAEnrollment1227FacultyXxxMascotTigerSchool colorsBlue, Silver, & WhiteCarthage Senior High School is a public school located in Missouri USA.Location and campusThe schools main campus is located on Main Street in historic downtown Carthage, near the square and the Jasper County courthouse.  The main building is a four-story structure, constructed of Carthage Marble, a type of limestone native to the Middle-Eastern area, and used prominently in many local buildings.  The original 1904 building has two notable attached additions, a gymnasium (added in 1952,) and a 900-seat lodge.  The original building included a smaller auditorium, which was converted during construction of the new addition in 1986-1987 into classroom space and a media center.  Adjacent to the main building are several annex buildings, which support additional classroom space, athletic facilities, and school district offices.The school also has a well-equipped Technical Center, located at 609 River Street, which houses classes in the vocational and technical fields.Notably, the schools football stadium and related practice facilities are located on the campus of the Junior High School, on Centennial Avenue.  Several attempts have been made in recent years to raise funds to build an all-new facility, which would presumably attempt to combine the hodgepodge of buildings and facilities into one contiguous campus.  The most recent bond issue, a $30-million proposal, was approved by local voters on April 4, 2006.  The new facilities are currently completed.HistoryCarthages first school likely opened around 1848, on the town squares north side.  (Surviving records are unclear at best, but numerous sources make mention of such a school.)The first high school opened its doors at the present location in 1860, with Samuel Kealand acting as its first Principal.  Officially named the Carthage Male and Female Academy, the school was built at a cost of $1,000, on donated land.  As was fashionable at the time, the wood-framed building included a cupola, complete with a 125 lb (275 kg) iron bell, that was imported from Sheffield, England.  The Male and Female Academy was destroyed in an 1861 fire, when the city was razed during the Civil War.  The bell is the only part of that original building that survives.  It was restored and placed on permanent display in the current school in 1917, through donations from alumni.Following the Civil War, the Central School was built in 1872, on the location of the destroyed Male and Female Academy.  A stately red brick structure, it stood on the corner of Main and Chestnut Streets for the next 79 years.  After construction of the current school building to its north, the old Central School building was converted to an annex and renamed the Manual Arts Building.  The building was eventually demolished in 1951, to make way for the current schools gymnasium addition.Due to the post-war zinc and lead mining boom in southwest Missouri, Carthage saw significant population growth.  This led to the need for a larger high school.  In 1904, the current building was completed, at a cost of $100,000.Notable alumni* Newell Blair (1877&ndash;1951),  was an American writer, suffragist, national Democratic Party political leader, a founder of the League of Women Voters and feminist.* L. Kavandi Ph. D., NASA astronaut and veteran of 3 Shuttle missions - Class of 1977, Valedictorian* Perkins, naturalist and host of TVs Mutual of Omahas Wild Kingdom - Class of 1923* Wright, CFL and NFL pro football player - Class of 1977*  Homer L. Hall -  Award-winning American journalist, educator and widely published author.  Inducted into the Missouri Interscholastic Press Association Hall of Fame and National Scholastic Journalism Hall of Fame. - Class of 1956.GalleryImage:Carthage_MO_High_School_Football_Field.jpg|K.E. Baker StadiumImage:New_Carthage_MO_High_School_09-30-2007.jpg|New School Facilities Under ConstructionExternal links*Carthage Senior High School website*Carthage R-9 School District websiteSources* Carthaginian, vol. 4 (1914 school yearbook)* Carthaginian, vol. 41 (1951 school yearbook)* Carthaginian, vol. 42 (1952 school yearbook)* Carthaginian, vol. 77 (1987 school yearbook)
4267238
Colony_of_British_Columbia
The Colony of British Columbia was a colony in North America from 1858 until 1871.  At its creation, it physically constituted approximately half the present day Canadian province of Columbia, since it did not include the Colony of Vancouver Island, the vast and still largely uninhabited regions north of the Nass and Rivers, the regions east of the Mountains, or any of the coastal islands.  The of the Queen Charlotte Islands and the Territory were merged with it in 1863, and it was amalgamated in 1866 with the of Vancouver Island to form a further colonial entity named British Columbia, but unofficially known as the Colonies of Vancouver Island and British Columbia to avoid confusion.BackgroundMain Article:  of British ColumbiaThe explorations of Cook and Vancouver, and the concessions of Spain in 1794 established British claims over the coastal area north of California.  Similar claims were established inland via the explorations of such men as John Finlay, Alexander Mackenzie, Simon Fraser, Black, and David Thompson, and by the subsequent establishment of fur trading posts by the West Company and the Bay Company (HBC).  However, until 1858, the region which now comprises the mainland of the Province of British Columbia was an unorganized area of British North America comprising two fur trading districts:  New Caledonia, north of the River drainage; and the District, located south of the Thompson and throughout the basin of the River.  With the signing of the Treaty of Washington in 1846, which established the US border along the 49th parallel, the HBC moved the headquarters of its western operations from Vancouver on the Columbia River (present day Washington) to the newly established Fort Victoria, on the southern tip of Island.  Vancouver Island and the surrounding Islands in the of Georgia were organised as a crown colony in 1849.  Meanwhile, the mainland continued to function under the de facto administration of the HBC, whose chief executive, James Douglas, also happened to be governor of Vancouver Island.  The non-aboriginal mainland population during this time never exceeded about 150, mostly HBC employees and their families.By 1857, Americans and British were beginning to respond to rumours of gold in the River area. Almost overnight, some ten to twenty thousand men moved into the region around present-day British Columbia, sparking the Canyon Gold Rush.  Governor Douglas and the colonial office were suddenly faced with having to exert British authority over a largely alien population.  Douglas  who had no legal authority over New Caledonia  stationed a gunboat at the entrance of the River in order to exert such authority by collecting licenses from prospectors attempting to make their way upstream. In order to normalise its jurisdiction, and undercut any HBC claims to the resource wealth of the mainland, the district was converted to a crown colony on August 2, 1858 by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and given the name British Columbia. Douglas was offered the governorship of the new colony by the colonial secretary, Edward Bulwer-Lytton, on condition that he sever his relationship with the HBC. Douglas accepted these conditions, and a knighthood. British Columbia was given its own capital  Westminster  in 1859, but James Douglas would govern both colonies from Victoria for the next six years.Governorship of Sir James DouglasThe influx of people into the new colony required Douglas to act quickly in drawing up regulations and creating infrastructure.  Magistrates and constables were hired, mining regulations drawn up, and townsites surveyed at Yale, Hope and Fort Langley in order to discourage squatting on land.  In addition, roads were constructed into the areas of greatest mining exploration around Lillooet and Lytton.  The colony, however, was not immediately granted a representative colonial assembly, because of uncertainty as to whether the gold rush would yield a stable, settled population.  Douglas, who had endured unhappy conflicts with the assembly on Vancouver Island, was relieved.File:Cariboo Road.jpg|thumb|right|A portion of the Road in the Canyon, circa 1867. The rush indeed was short lived, and the exodus of miners, speculators, and merchants was already underway by the time the Engineers had laid out the colonys new capital at Westminster.  Prospecting continued, however, and additional finds farther inland in the Cariboo region in 1860 signalled an impending second gold rush. Provisioning was already proving to be an acute problem, and with more distant finds it became clear that trains would have to replace pack horses, necessitating new infrastructure.  By 1862, the Gold Rush, attracting an additional 5000 miners, was underway, and Douglas hastened construction of the Great North Road (commonly known now as the Wagon Road) up the Canyon to the prospecting region around Barkerville.By the time of this second gold rush, the character of the colony was changing, as a more stable population of British colonists settled in the region, establishing businesses, opening sawmills, and engaging in fishing and agriculture.  With this increased stability, objections to the colonys absentee governor and the lack of government began to be vocalised, led by the influential editor of the Westminster British Columbian and future premier, Robson.  A series of petitions requesting an assembly were ignored by Douglas and the colonial office until Douglas was eased out of office in 1864.  Finally the colony would have both an assembly and a resident governor.Governorship of Frederick SeymourDouglass successor was Seymour, who came to the colony with twenty years of colonial experience in Diemens Land, the West Indies, and Honduras.  The creation of an assembly and Seymours appointment in April, 1864 signalled a new era for the colony, now out of the shadow of Vancouver Island and free of a governor suspicious of sharing power with elected representatives.  Douglass wagon road project was still underway, presenting huge engineering challenges, as it made its way up the narrow Fraser Canyon.  Successive loans authorised by Seymours predecessor, largely for the purpose of completing the road, had put the colony 200,000 in debt; and the War of 1864 cost an additional 18,000 to suppress.  Seymour himself made the difficult journey through the Canyon of the Homathko and Range as a show of force and participation in the hunt for Klatsassin, the Tsilhqotin war leader, but the armed expedition reached a denouement when Klatsassin surrendered on terms of amnesty in times of war, only to be tried and hanged for murder, as Seymour had not endorsed the terms.On Seymours return overland, he made a tour of the Cariboo minefields, and along the Fraser Canyon, which made him increasingly convinced of the colonys future prosperity.  On returning to the capital, however, fiscal reality set in as it became clear that British Columbias indebtedness was getting worse.  Even as the colonial administration took drastic measures to augment revenues and improve the road system to attract prospectors and settlers, the economic situation grew increasingly dire, and agitation grew for an almagamation of the two colonies.  Seymour opposed this proposal, but with pressure from various quarters of the colonial government, he eventually relented, recommending that British Columbia be the dominant partner, and (unsuccessfully) that the capital be located at New Westminster.  The two colonies were united by an Act of the British Parliament, and proclaimed on August 6, 1866 (see Colonies of Vancouver Island and British Columbia).Governors of British Columbia* Sir James Douglas, 1858-1864* Seymour, 1864-1866See also*colonies and territories in Canada*evolution of Canada after 1867*of Vancouver Island*Colonies of Vancouver Island and British Columbia*of Governors of Vancouver Island and British Columbia*TerritoryExternal links*Biography of Douglas at the Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online*Biography of Seymour at the Dictionary of Canadian Biography OnlineColumbia (Kolonie)de la Columbia BritnicaBrytyjska (kolonia)de Columbia Britnica ()
4272737
Grua
Grua is a village in the municipality of Lunner, Norway. Its population (2005) is 1,477. Mining is historically important, and Norways oldest registered iron mine (from 1538) is located here.(Norwegen)nl:Gruano:Gruann:Grua
4281352
James_Alexander_Forrest
thumb|200px|James Alexander Forrest upon receiving an honorary Doctors of Laws degree, 1979.Sir James Jim Alexander Forrest (10 March 1905-26 September 1990) was an Australian lawyer, businessman and philanthropist.Born in Victoria, Forrest was educated at Grammar School in Melbourne before studying an articled clerks course at the of Melbourne. Although this course did not end with him receiving a law degree, Forrest became qualified to work as both a barrister and solicitor in Victoria. His admission to the Victorian Bar was moved by both Menzies and Fullagar, and presided over by William Irvine, then the Chief Justice of the Court of Victoria.Forrest became a prominent lawyer, specialising in corporate law. He was a partner at the firm of Hedderwicks Fookes & Alston, which later merged to become Allens Arthur Robinson.(Allens Arthur Robinson (2006). Our history. Retrieved 5 March 2006.) During War II, he was a Flight Lieutenant in the Australian Air Force, and shortly after the war took up several board directorships of Australian companies. From 1959 to 1978, he served as the Chairman of the National Bank of Australasia, and he served at both Alcoa Australia and Western Mining Corporation as Chairman and director respectively.From 1961 to 1971 he was a foundation member of the Council of University. In 1979, he was awarded an honorary of Laws degree by the university for service to the law, commerce and Monash itself. He was a board member of numerous charitable and educational bodies, including the Royal Childrens Hospital, Scotch College, Australia, and an original member of the Victoria Law Foundation. He was also a Fellow of the Academy of Science from 1977 to his death, after becoming the fourth person inducted into the Fellowship by Special Election.A portrait of Forrest, donated by Alcoa, now hangs in the National Portrait Gallery at Old Parliament House.(Howard (2003). TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP RECEPTION TO MARK THE OCCASION OF ALCOA GIFTING THREE WORKS TO THE NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY, OLD PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA. Retrieved 5 March 2006.) He was made a Bachelor in 1967 for services to the community.(Australian Honours (2006). FORREST, James Alexander. Retrieved 12 June 2006.)References(External links*Australian Academy of Science biographical memior
4293663
Electoral_district_of_Collie-Preston
The Electoral district of Collie-Preston is a Legislative Assembly electorate in the state of Australia. While the seat was known as Collie for just over a century of its existence as an electorate, the seat was known as South West Mining from 1901 to 1904, and Collie-Wellington from 2005 to 2008. It is named for the South West coal mining town of Collie. While historically a very safe seat for the Labor Party, redistributions in 1988 and 2007 due to increases in the quota for country seats which had historically been malapportioned resulted in the seat incorporating surrounding rural shires which were hostile to Labor, and in 2008, the seat is rated as marginal Labor by Antony Green, favouring Labor by 0.9% on present numbers.()HistoryCollie was originally created as the seat of South West Mining in the Constitution Act Amendment Act 1899, the last redistribution of seats to require a modification of the Constitution.( Given assent on 16 December 1899.) It was first contested at the 1901 election. In 1904, it was renamed Collie with almost no changes to its boundaries.( Given assent on 16 January 1904.) In the Redistribution of Seats Act 1911, its boundaries were so unusually contorted by the then-Liberal government, which was accused of trying to lock Labor votes in Premier Frank Wilsons marginal seat of Sussex behind Collies boundaries, that the Miner and other newspapers used the seats map as an effective mascot for the bill. However, the boundaries remained unchanged until a later redistribution ahead of the 1930 election.The seat changed hands three times between the Liberal member Ewing and his Labor rivals, but the seat was securely Labor from the 1908 election and for 81 years continuously remained a Labor seat, with only three members during that timeArthur Wilson until 1947, then May until 1968 and Tom Jones until 1989.() In 1986, the seat had 9,410 enrolled voters compared with an average of 13,796 statewide and over 28,000 in some metropolitan electorates such as Joondalup and Murdoch. The Burke Labor governments Acts Amendment (Electoral Reform) Act 1987, passed with National Party support, increased metropolitan representation from 29 to 34 out of 57 seats, and the 1988 redistribution which resulted in Collie gaining parts of Dale and Warren combined with a significant statewide swing against the Labor Party delivered the seat to the Nationals Dr Turnbull, who held the seat until the 2001 election. Labors Mick Murray, head of the Country Labor grouping in Western Australia, gained the seat on his third attempt with a margin of just 34 votes. In the 2003 redistribution, the seat was renamed Collie-Wellington when it lost its southern and eastern sections and incorporated large sections of Waroona and Harvey which had been part of Murray-Wellington. The 2007 redistribution renamed the seat Collie-Preston and largely reversed the 2003 redistribution, but adding the coastal section of the of Capel which brought in residents on the fringes of metropolitan Bunbury.GeographyCollie-Preston presently includes the Shires of Collie, Capel, Donnybrook-Balingup and Dardanup. It includes the Bunbury suburbs of Dalyellup, Eaton and Millbridge, the towns of Balingup, Boyanup, Burekup, Capel, Collie, Dardanup, Donnybrook and Kirup.() The seat has changed many times through its history. In the 1950s, the seat was limited to the region around Collie itself and mining areas within the of West Arthur. By 1968, the seat consisted of the Shires of Collie, Donnybrook-Balingup and Boyup Brook districts, and from 1976 to 1982 also included Dardanup. The 1988 redistribution added Boddington from the abolished Dale, as well as the Greenbushes district from Warren. The 1994 redistribution added Dardanup and eastern Capel, including Boyanup but excluding Eaton and the coastal regions. Ahead of the state election, only Collie and Dardanup were retained, with the seat gaining Waroona and most of Harvey (excluding Australind and other urban districts which were part of Leschenault). The 2007 redistribution, which took effect at the 2008 election, brought back Dardanup and Donnybrook-Balingup, but also added Capel from the abolished Capel district, and the Bunbury suburb of Eaton from the abolished Leschenault. This change rendered Collie a marginal Labor seat, with Labors 81.7% two-party-preferred vote across the six booths in the town of Collie contrasting with the Liberals 60.1% two-party-preferred vote across the three outer Bunbury booths.(The statistical returns for 2005 show 3,648 out of 4,466 voters preferred Labor at Allanson, Wilson Park and the four Collie booths, and 2,983 out of 4,683 voters preferred Liberal at Dalyellup, Eaton and Gelorup booths.) With the rural districts generally historically preferring Liberal candidates62.7% at the 2005 election and 61.9% at the 2007 federal electionthe seat has been rated by Antony Green as marginal Labor with a margin of 0.9% going into the election.(Members for CollieElection resultstitleAustralian state election, 2008: Collie-Preston: The 2007 redistribution resulted in a notional Labor majority of 0.9%. Therefore, the swings presented are based on the ABCs calculation of redistributed results, rather than the actual results at the 2005 election. References External links* Electorate Profile (Antony Green, ABC)
4301279
Business_marketing
Business Marketing is the practice of individuals, or organizations, including commercial businesses, governments and institutions, facilitating the sale of their products or services to other companies or organizations that in turn resell them, use them as components in products or services they offer, or use them to support their operations. Also known as marketing, business marketing is also called business-to-business marketing, or B2B marketing, for short. (Note that while marketing to government entities shares some of the same dynamics of organizational marketing, B2G Marketing is meaningfully different.) Origins of business marketing In the broadest sense, the practice of one purveyor of goods doing trade with another is as old as commerce itself. As a niche in the field of marketing as we know it today, however, its history is more recent. In his introduction to Fundamentals of Business Marketing Research, J. David Lichtenthal, professor of marketing at the University of New Yorks School of Business, notes that industrial marketing has been around since the mid-19th century, although the bulk of research on the discipline of business marketing has come about in the last 25 years.Morris, Pitt and Honeycutt, 2001, point out that for many years business marketing took a back seat to consumer marketing, which entailed providers of goods or services selling directly to households through media and retail channels. This began to change in middle to late 1970s. A variety of academic periodicals, such as the Journal of Business-to-Business Marketing and the Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, now publish studies on the subject regularly, and professional conferences onbusiness-to-business marketing are held every year. Whats more, business marketing courses are commonplace at many universities today. In fact, Dwyer and Tanner (2006) point out that more marketing majors begin their careers in business marketing today than in consumer marketing.Business Markets -- (Business Marketing Management:B2B By Michael D Hutt & Thomas w Speh)Business markets are markets for products & services, local to international,bought by;1. Businesses,2.Government Bodies,3.Institutions such as Hospitals or corporates  for incorporation (E.G; ingredient materials or components) for consumption(E.g. process materials, office supplies & consulting services) for use or for resale..... The only markets not of direct interest are those dealing with products or services which are principally directed at personal use or consumption such as packaged grocery products , home appliances,  or consumer bankingThe factors that distinguish business marketing from consumer marketing are the nature of the customer & how the customer uses the product. Business & consumer markets - the link Business markets have a derived demand - this means that a demand in business markets exists only because of another demand somewhere in the consumer market. Lets take a few examples :* The government of India wishes to purchase equipment for a nuclear power plant in Jaitapur - a business market demand. The underlying consumer demands that have triggered this demand are that the people of India are now consuming more electricity - they have bought more washing machines, microwaves, computers, charged devices etc. *  The demand for restaurant furniture is based on the consumer demand of more restaurants.  Thus business markets do not exist in isolation. Cities or countries with growing consumption are generally growing business markets too. A single consumer market demand can give rise to hundreds of business market demands. The demand for cars in India creates demands for steel, tyres, forgings, castings, plastic components which in turn has created demands for mining, rubber, forging machines, casting sand and polymers. Each of these growing demands has further triggered more demands. Thus as the spending power of citizens increase, the country generally sees a upward wave in its economy. Business marketing vs. consumer marketing Although on the surface the differences between business and consumer marketing may seem obvious, there are more subtle distinctions between the two with substantial ramifications. Dwyer and Tanner (2006) note that business marketing generally entails shorter and more direct channels of distribution.While consumer marketing is aimed at large groups through mass media and retailers, the negotiation process between the buyer and seller is more personal in business marketing. According to Hutt and Speh (2004), most business marketers commit only a small part of their promotional budgets to advertising, and that is usually through direct mail efforts and trade journals. While that advertising is limited, it often helps the business marketer set up successful sales calls.Marketing to a business trying to make a profit (business-to-business marketing) as opposed to an individual for personal use (Business-to-Consumer, or B2C marketing) is similar in terms of the fundamental principles of marketing. In B2C, B2B and B2G marketing situations, the marketer must always:* successfully match the product or service strengths with the needs of a definable target market;* position and price to align the product or service with its market, often an intricate balance; and* communicate and sell it in the fashion that demonstrates its value effectively to the target market.These are the fundamental principles of the 4 Ps of marketing (the mix) first documented by Jerome McCarthy in 1960.(McCarthy, Jerome E.: Basic Marketing: A Managerial Approach. Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1996)While other businesses might seem like the simple answer, Dwyer and Tanner (2006) say business customers fall into four broad categories: companies that consume products or services, government agencies, institutions and resellers.The first category includes equipment manufacturers, such as large automakers who buy gauges to put in their cars and also small firms owned by 1-2 individuals who purchase products to run their business. The second category - government agencies, is the biggest. In fact, the U.S. government is the biggest single purchaser of products and services in the country, spending more than $300 billion annually. But this category also includes state and governments. The third category, institutions, includes schools, hospitals and homes, churches and charities. Finally, resellers consist of wholesalers, brokers and industrial distributors.So what are the meaningful differences between B2B and B2C marketing?A B2C sale is to a Consumer i.e. an individual who may be influenced by other factors such as family members or friends, but ultimately the sale is to a single person who pays for the transaction. A B2B sale is to a Business i.e. organization or firm. Given the complexity of structure, B2B sales typically involve multiple decision makers. The marketing mix is affected by the B2B uniqueness which include complexity of business products and services, diversity of demand and the differing nature of the sales itself (including fewer customers buying larger volumes).(Kotler & Pfoertsch: B2B Brand Management, page 21. Springer Berlin, 2006) Because there are some important subtleties to the B2B sale, the issues are broken down beyond just the original 4 Ps developed by McCarthy. Business to business(B2B) Marketing Strategies B2B BrandingBranding is different from B2C in some crucial ways, including the need to closely align corporate brands, divisional brands and product/service brands and to apply your brand standards to material often considered informal such as email and other electronic correspondence. it is mainly of large scale when compared with B2C Product (or Service) Because business customers are focused on creating value for themselves, the cost-saving or revenue-producing benefits of products and services are important to factor in throughout the product development and marketing cycles. People (Target Market) Quite often, the market for a business product or service is smaller and has more specialized needs reflective of a specific industry or niche.(Malaval: Strategy and Management of Industrial Brandds: Business to Business Products and Services, page 16. 2001) A B2B niche, a segment of the market, can be described in terms of firmographics which requires marketers to have good business intelligence in order to increase response rates.  Regardless of the size of the target market, the business customer is making an organizational purchase decision and the dynamics of this, both procedurally and in terms of how they value what they are buying from you, differ dramatically from the consumer market. There may be multiple influencers on the purchase decision, which may also have to be marketed to, though they may not be members of the making unit.(Brown, Duncan and Hayes, Nick. Influencer Marketing: Who really influences your customers?, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2008) Pricing The business market can be convinced to pay premium prices more often than the consumer market if you know how to structure your pricing and payment terms well. This price premium is particularly achievable if you support it with a strong brand.(Kotler & Pfoertsch: B2B Brand Management, page 53. Springer Berlin, 2006) Promotion Promotion planning is relatively easy when you know the media, information seeking and decision making habits of your base, not to mention the vocabulary unique to their segment. Specific trade shows, analysts, publications, blogs and retail/wholesale outlets tend to be fairly common to each industry/product area. What this means is that once you figure it out for your industry/product, the promotion plan almost writes itself (depending on your budget) but figuring it out can be a special skill and it takes time to build up experience in your specific field. Promotion techniques rely heavily on communications strategies (see below). Place (Sales and Distribution) The importance of a knowledgeable, experienced and effective direct (inside or outside) sales force is often critical in the business market. If you sell through distribution channels also, the number and type of sales forces can vary tremendously and your success as a marketer is highly dependent on their success. B2B Marketing Communications Methodologies The purpose of B2B marketing communications is to support the organizations sales effort and improve company profitability. B2B marketing communications tactics generally include advertising, relations, direct mail, trade show support, sales collateral, branding, and interactive services such as website design and engine optimization. The Business Marketing Association http://www.marketing.org is the trade organization that serves B2B marketing professionals. It was founded in 1922 and offers certification programs, research services, conferences, industry awards and training programs. Positioning Statement An important first step in business to business marketing is the development of your positioning statement. This is a statement of what you do and how you do it differently and better and more efficiently than your competitors. Developing your messages The next step is to develop your messages.  There is usually a primary message that conveys more strongly to your customers what you do and the benefit it offers to them, supported by a number of secondary messages, each of which may have a number of supporting arguments, facts and figures. Building a campaign plan Whatever form your B2B marketing campaign will take, build a comprehensive plan up front to target resources where you believe they will deliver the best return on investment, and make sure you have all the infrastructure in place to support each stage of the marketing process - and that doesnt just include developing the lead - make sure the entire organization is geared up to handle the inquiries appropriately. Briefing an agency A standard briefing document is usually a good idea for briefing an agency.  As well as focusing the agency on whats important to you and your campaign, it serves as a checklist of all the important things to consider as part of your brief.  Typical elements to an agency brief are: Your objectives, target market, audience, product, campaign description, your product positioning, graphical considerations, corporate guidelines, and any other supporting material and distribution. Measuring results The real value in results measurement is in tying the marketing campaign back to business results. After all, youre not in the business of developing marketing campaigns for marketing sake.  So always put metrics in place to measure your campaigns, and if at all possible, measure your impact upon your desired objectives, be it Cost Per Acquisition, Cost per Lead or tangible changes in customer perception. How big is business marketing? Hutt and Speh (2001) note that business marketers serve the largest market of all; the dollar volume of transactions in the industrial or business market significantly exceeds that of the ultimate consumer market. For example, they note that companies such as GE, DuPont and IBM spend more than $60 million a day on purchases to support their operations.Dwyer and Tanner (2006) say the purchases made by companies, government agencies and institutions account for more than half of the economic activity in industrialized countries such as the United States, Canada and France.A 2003 study sponsored by the Marketing Association estimated that business-to-business marketers in the United States spend about $85 billion a year to promote their and services. The BMA study breaks that spending out as follows (figures are in billions of dollars):* Trade Shows/Events -- $17.3* Internet/Electronic Media -- $12.5* Promotion/Market Support -- $10.9* Magazine Advertising -- $10.8* Publicity/Public Relations -- $10.5* Direct Mail -- $9.4* Dealer/Distributor Materials -- $5.2* Market Research -- $3.8* Telemarketing -- $2.4* Directories -- $1.4* Other -- $5.1The fact that there is such a thing as the Business Marketing Association speaks to the size and credibility of the industry. BMA traces its origins to 1922 with the formation of the National Industrial Advertising Association. Today, BMA, headquartered in Chicago, has more than 2,000 members in 19 chapters across the country. Among its members are marketing communications agencies that are largely or exclusively business-to-business-oriented. Whats driving growth in B2B Marketing? The tremendous growth and change that business marketing is experiencing is due in large part to three revolutions occurring around the world today, according to Morris, Pitt and Honeycutt (2001).First is the technological revolution. Technology is changing at an unprecedented pace, and these changes are speeding up the pace of new product and service development. A large part of that has to do with the Internet, which is discussed in more detail below.Technology and business strategy go hand in hand. Both are corelated.  While technology supports forming organization strategy, the business strategy is also helpful in technology development. Both play a great role in business marketing.Second is the entrepreneurial revolution. To stay competitive, many companies have downsized and reinvented themselves. Adaptability, flexibility, speed, aggressiveness and innovativeness are the keys to remaining competitive today. Marketing is taking the entrepreneurial lead by finding segments, untapped needs and new uses for existing products, and by creating new processes for sales, distribution and customer service.The third revolution is one occurring within marketing itself. Companies are looking beyond traditional assumptions and adopting new frameworks, theories, models and concepts. Theyre also moving away from the mass market and the preoccupation with the transaction. Relationships, partnerships and alliances are what define marketing today. The cookie-cutter approach is out. Companies are customizing marketing programs to individual accounts. The impact of the Internet The Internet has become an integral component of the relationship management strategy for business marketers. Dwyer and Tanner (2006) note that business marketers not only use the Internet to improve service but also to improve opportunities with distributors.According to Anderson and Narus (2004), two new types of resellers have emerged as by-products of the Internet: infomediaries and metamediaries. Infomediaries, such as Google and Yahoo, are engine companies that also function as brokers, or middlemen, in the business marketing world. They charge companies fees to find information on the Web as well as for banner and ads and search engine optimization services. Metamediaries are companies with robust Internet sites that furnish customers with multiproduct, multivendor and multiservice marketspace in return for commissions on sales.With the advent of b-to-b exchanges, the Internet ushered in an enthusiasm for collaboration that never existed beforeand in fact might have even seemed ludicrous 10 years ago. For example, a decade ago who would have imagined Ford, Motors and DaimlerChrysler entering into a joint venture? Thats exactly what happened after all three of the Big Three began moving their purchases online in the late 1990s. All three companies were pursuing their own initiatives when they realized the economies of scale they could achieve by pooling their efforts. Thus was born what then was the worlds largest Internet business when Fords Auto-Xchange and GMs TradeXchange merged, with DaimlerChrysler representing the third partner.While this exchange did not stand the test of time, others have, including Agentrics, which was formed in 2005 with the merger of WorldWide Retail Exchange and GlobalNetXchange, or GNX. Agentrics serves more 50 retailers around the world and more than 300 customers, and its members have combined sales of about $1 trillion. Hutt and Speh (2001) note that such virtual marketplaces enable companies and their suppliers to conduct business in real time as well as simplify purchase processes and cut costs. Notes ( References * Anderson, James C., and Narus, James A. (2004) Business Market Management: Understanding, Creating, and Delivering Value, 2nd Edition, 2004, Education, Inc.* Business Marketing Association (2003) Marketing Reality Survey* Dwyer, F. Robert, Tanner, John F. (2006) Business Marketing: Connecting Strategy, Relationships, and Learning, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill/Irwin* Greco, John A. Jr., (2005) Past indicates promising future for b-to-b direct; BtoB magazine, June 13, 2005* Hutt, Michael D., Speh, Thomas W. (2004) Business Marketing Management: A Strategic View of Industrial and Organizational Markets, 8th Edition, Thomson/South-Western* Morris, Michael H., Pitt, Leyland F., and Honeycutt, Earl Dwight (2001) Business-to-Business Marketing: A Strategic Approach, Sage Publications Inc.* Reid, David A., and Plank, Richard E. (2004) Fundamentals of Business Marketing Research, Best Business Books, an Imprint of The Haworth Press, Inc.* Brown, Duncan and Hayes, Nick. Influencer Marketing: Who really influences your customers?, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2008 External links af:Besigheidsbemarkingmarketinguk:-zh:
4311007
List_of_The_King_of_Braves_GaoGaiGar_antagonists
This is an index of antagonist characters and mecha in the anime and manga King of Braves GaoGaiGar and King of Braves GaoGaiGar FINAL.Zonder RobosWhen a living humanoid being (human or alien) is infected with Zonder Metal, it becomes a Zonder. Zonders will almost invariably fuse with mechanical objects and inorganic matter to form a biomechanical Zonder Robo.  These Zonder Robos immediately seek out and eliminate the source of their stress, at which point they begin to produce Zonder Spores and mature into Zonder Metal Plants. Nearly all of them possess fast regeneration, can fuse with machines that are not protected by a G-Stone or GS Drive, and a force field that is referred to in Robot Wars Alpha 3 as a zondar barrier.A Zonderian can fuse with similar types of material to form a Zonderian Robo, bearing similar properties to that of a Zonder Robo (though several orders stronger).All Zonder Robos and Zonderian Robos are collectively identified by GGG using the code EI (standing for Extraterrestrial Intelligence).EI-02Garbage Amalgam Robo. Created by the Four Machine Kings infusion of Zonder Metal into Kinzo Kodakarayama. The Zondar used a pair of beam weapons attached to its arms; a freezing beam (generated by many freezers and air conditioners) and a heat ray (made up of many microwaves) to attack. It can also turn into a train. Resembles a Pegasus due to psychological influence from Kinzo, a homeless man who had lost all his money gambling on horse races.EI-03Iron Ball Machine Robo. Created by Pinchernones infusion of Zonder Metal into Bomber Death (bomba shinigami), reigning champion of the SMW pro wrestling league. Fused with the wrestling ring he was in and a nearby demolition crane to create a Zonder Robo with tethered hands that detach and combine to form a wrecking ball. Other abilities include using its hands like giant saws and surging red electricity from its body.EI-04Triple Locomotive Robo. Created through Polonaises infusion of Zonder Metal into Yuichi Yamanoguchi, a troubled boy who envied the power of locomotives. Fused with a nearby steam locomotive to create a Zonder Robo with firebox arms that launch a rapid barrage of coal-shaped fireballs. This Zonder Robos core reverted to Zonder form and escaped before Purification could be performed.EI-05Space Shuttle Robo. When the Zonder-infected Yuichi Yamanoguchi escaped from GaoGaiGar, he was instructed by Pizza to fuse with a Space Development Corporation shuttle mounted to a new type of engine which can also be used to attack opponents. Cyborg Guy managed to prevent this Zonder Robo from reaching orbit by removing the shuttles secondary boosters and puncturing its main propellant tank with GaiGars claw hand. EI-05 also possesses a large talon-like claw in its appearances in the Robot Wars series.EI-06Trailer Robo. Created through Primardas infusion of Zonder Metal into Isao Takayama, a truck driver infuriated with bumper-to-bumper traffic. Fused with his truck to create a constantly-rolling Zonder Robo with a gigantic steamroller for a lower body, crushing and absorbing into itself anything on the road ahead of it. It is also armed with a large claw and energy draining waves.EI-07Tanker Robo. Created by Pinchernones infusion of Zonder Metal into a depressed ships captain who was fired after his ship ran aground. This Zondar was over 500 meters in height, and absorbed approximately 100,000 gallons of gasoline, which allowed it to detonate with incredible force when defeated. It also squirted explosive fuel from its mouth. GaoGaiGar managed to trap it using the Dividing Driver, and was saved from the explosion by ChoRyuJins Eraser Head.EI-08300-series Shinkansen Robo.  The result of a man who was apparently afflicted by the Shinkansen and went missing one night. This Zonders first form was a Shinkansen-style bullet train, similar to LinerGao, and then a tall robot form. This Zonder generated an immensely powerful electromagnetic pulse as it moved, and could fire powerful beams of energy from its eye. GaoGaiGar and ChoRyuJin worked together to defeat this Zonder: ChoRyuJin nullified the Zonders EMP using the Eraser Head, allowing GaoGaiGar to execute Hell and Heaven to remove the core.It is interesting to note that the episode EI-08 appeared in aired around a month before the Series Shinkansen went active.EI-09Airship Robo. Created through Pizzas infusion of Zonder Metal into a troubled businessman, fused with a blimp.  EI-09 created a giant flammable cloud that covered the sun for several days.  Formed a complete Zonder Metal Plant, but was destroyed by GaoGaiGar and the Eraser Head before it could fire its Zonder Spores across the world.EI-10Bike Robo. Created by using Zonder Metal on a pizza girl who was always late. Defeated by the Pencil Launcher holding it in place long enough for GaoGaiGar to use Hell and Heaven. EI-10 could turn its fingers into tentacles and separate into dozens of motorcycles.EI-11Submarine Robo. Created through Pinchernones infusion of Zonder Metal into a sailor who was disqualified from captaining the newly-christened Ryuuguu 9000 submarine. It proceeded to fuse into said submarine, accidentally taking Mamoru and Hana, then descending into the deep sea, again merging with a Navy submarine. It was defeated with Broken Magnum (though the final blow isnt shown) by GaoGaiGar in the Trench through a complex plan using the Dividing Driver to protect from deep sea pressure, rescuing Mamoru and Hana. EI-11 possesses large pincer claws and can launch homing torpedoes from its body.EI-12Particle Accelerator Robo. Created through the infection of the work-absorbed Head Professor Tohru Nozaki, who covertly established a complete Zonder Metal plant in the Isolde accelerator in Hokkaido. This time, Nozaki reported straight to Pasder, and all four Machine Kings were present, so this could be considered one of the first major fights. They had successfully lured HyoRyu, EnRyu and GaiGar deep within the facility into an electromagnetic field until Volfogg, a factor unforeseen by the Zonderians, infiltrated the south wing and the hostages and the mobile team from their respective traps. With the Dividing Field set, EI-12 was defeated by GaoGaiGars Hell and Heaven, destroying the Zonder Metal plant in effect.Tohru Nozaki went on to work for the GGG Orbit Base.EI-13Mascot Machine Robo. Created through Polonaises Zonder Metal infusion of a part-time worker at the Waterpolis Amusement Park in Okinawa, dressed as the park mascot Uppo. Desiring to ride the new Shooting Coaster, he proceed to merge with the said coaster while Mamoru and Hana rode it, able to bend the tracks to his will. Trapped and unconscious by the speed and g-force of EI-13, Mamoru was set as a means to lure Galeon out of GGG base according to Polonaises plan. After Volfoggs intervention, it merged with the tracks itself to become a long sea serpent-like Zonder capable of coiling and emitting electric surges. After Volfogg and Galeon freed Mamoru and defeated this form, EI-13 finally morphed into a giant version of Uppo armed with energy whips from the finger tips. It was soon defeated after Guys arrival by GaoGaiGars Hell and Heaven. EI-14 Military Transport Robo. Originally took the form of a large, military-transport aircraft (as the name implies). On board, the Zonderized human acting as its core was giving orders to remote-controlled tanks and helicopters who fought with Volfogg in order to capture Mamoru (finally recognized as a threat to the Zonder mission). After the jig was up, the plane seemingly crash-landed itself into the area where Volfogg had destroyed the remote-controlled vehicles, but had actually combined with their strewn pieces to take its true form, a military soldier-like robot much resembling the Zaku II of the Suit Gundam series.  It had various military-based armaments such as a tank-cannon, a steel knife, grenades, a helicopter blade, and a rapid-fire, six barrel gatling gun. It was defeated rather shamefully by GaoGaiGar, who put its various armaments to shame before dealing the final blow and ripping out its core.Zonder ValnerA Zonder formed from the dolphin Valner at G-City Park in the video game The King of Braves GaoGaiGar: Blockaded Numbers.  Was originally designated EI-15. Erased from records due to the circumstances at the end of the incident by Geki Hyuuma under orders from Kohtaroh Taiga.EI-15GGG Mecha Parts Robo. Created by Pinchernones infusion of Zonder Metal into Minoru Inobuzaki, a man who was overlooked for the GGG project in favor of Kosuke Entouji.  EI-15 infiltrated the Bay Tower Base and took over the operating system, replacing it with a Zonder-based one, as well as deleting the GaoMachine start-up programs.  Attempted to trap Volfogg within the Multidimensional Intelligence Submarine, but was quickly repelled by the intruder destruction program installed into it by Entouji.  Weakened, EI-15 escaped to the armory and fused to the GGG mecha parts, taking on an appearance that was very similar to GaoGaiGar, inheriting the ability to use both Broken Magnum as well as Hell and Heaven (and presumably Protect Shade, as its left arm had a similar design, though Protect Shade was never used). EI-15 could also stretch its arms long distances and had a large drill on its chest. It is the first Zonder to successfully block Hell and Heaven, by using the technique against it, but GaoGaiGar was ultimately able to break through the attack and retrieve the core. The core was promptly Purified, and Inobuzaki went on to become an operator in the GGG Orbit Base.EI-16Long-range Cannon Robo.  Created through Polonaises infusion of Zonder Metal into a man cramming for the examinations to enter Tokyo University, fused with the lost German Gustav rail cannon Dora.  (This is a fictional situation, as Dora was found in post-war Germany.)  Fired 80 cm shells at supersonic speed, and controlled parts of the track it sat on as well that could be used like tentacles. Targeted several of Japans major universities, but was stopped from destroying Tokyo University by ChoRyuJin. Fired at GaoGaiGar, but was blocked by the Dividing Driver at the cost of GaoGaiGars left arm. EI-16 was destroyed by a Broken Magnum and the backfire of its own shell, the core was protected by Big Volfoggs Mirror Coating.EI-17Tire Robo. Created through Primardas infusion of Zonder Metal into an incredibly obese man, fused with a junk yard filled with thousands of tires it could control mentally. Attacks would simply bounce off of its rubber surface, but despite this, it was easily defeated by usage of Hell and Heaven. However, the remnants of its body, when it exploded, created a super-folded space trap within the Dividing Field, which was eventually dissipated by the usage of the Dimension Pliers, foiling the trap to destroy GaoGaiGar within the Dividing Field. Prior to the springing of the trap, the Zonder core was purified, removing the mans stress as well as the source of it: his excess weight. The man was removed from the Dividing Field before the super-folded space trapped GaoGaiGar.EI-18Micro-machine Amalgam.  Created by Pizzas infusion of Zonder Metal into a man working in the Space Development Corporation, who also had a hobby for harmless magic tricks.  EI-18s core was not a part of the main body of the Zonder Robo, which consisted of millions of nanomachines.  The Zonder used these nanomachines to control of most of the Corporations employees, including Mikoto Utsugi and Mamorus surrogate father, Isamu Amami.  The controlled employees wreaked havoc on the center, but it was discovered that those who carried the special GGG pager were protected due to the frequency it emits disabled the nanomachines.  Volfogg was able to broadcast this frequency from the Space Development Corporation to free the employees from EI-18s control.  Pizza urged EI-18 to become a Zonder Robo in response, which soon engaged GaoGaiGar in combat.  The main body held a false core: GaoGaiGars usage of Hell and Heaven on this false core caused a chain reaction that created the Grand Nova from EI-18, which both trapped and damaged GaoGaiGar while simultaneously creating a Zonder Metal Plant.  Grand Nova was repeatedly thwarted ChoRyuJins attempts to dissipate it through the use of the Eraser Head, but was able to lower it enough for Guy, powered up with Hyper Mode, to escape with GaoGaiGar from the Grand Nova.Big Volfogg and Mamoru infiltrated the sewers, where Big Volfogg engaged both Pizza and Pinchernone in combat to distract both of them while Mamoru snuck around to Purify the core.  The Grand Nova, Zonder Metal Plant, and EI-18 were soon destroyed by the first use of the Goldion Hammer, just as Pizza, who saw through the distraction, attempted and failed to kill Mamoru.  The core was Purified shortly after.EI-19Science Lab Robo. Created through Pinchernones infusion of Zonder Metal unto the strict Vice Principal at Mamorus school. With literal control over everything in the school, it had enforced the students on a tight schedule, able to bar off any signals of distress from Mamoru or his friends (It was able to project holograms of the kids playing safely that was able to distract Volfogg for a while.) Volfogg soon saw the deception and took action. It was an uphill battle until GaoGaiGar used the Goldion Hammer; Mamoru and his friends, held hostage before the Zonder Core, were rescued right before by the Mobile Team. EI-19s other capabilities included levitation, acidic gas, missiles, electric tentacles, and energy beams.EI-20Gravity Manipulator Robo. Polonaise and Primardas infusion of Zonder Metal onto Professor Akiko Hirata, who had faced unforeseen technical difficulties when demonstrating the worlds first gravity manipulation chamber at the Science Center. Absorbing the chamber, it was able to inflict all of G-Island with enough force that the Island would eventually sink, slowly leveling the area and leaving everyone helpless to even move. Goldymarg - however - was able to withstand the gravity enough to move. Breaking from his station, he confronted EI-20. It was able to pummel Goldymarg through manipulation of gravity and anti-gravity, until the support unit fired a tank beam into the sky. Using an arched trajectory through effect of the increased gravity, he was able to hit the space centers observatory, sending a chunk into the Zonder, disabling the gravity manipulator to buy enough time for the rest of the GGG to be able to act. This is the first formal use of the Goldion Hammer through Goldymarg and GaoGaiGars Hammer Hell and Heaven technique.Akiko Hirata would become one of the three chief scientists of the GGG Orbital Base, alongside Inobuzaki and Nozaki.EI-21B-52 Bomber Robo. Pizzas infusion of Zonder Metal onto a man who desired to fly at the Air Show, fusing with a Stratofortress that Hana and her cousin Ayame happened to be in. After raiding the Defense Force base, it headed for G-Island dropping its payload in bombs along its path. After Hana and Ayame were freed, Goldymarg had taken it down and both were sent falling toward the city, until GaoGaiGar used the Dividing Driver. Goldymarg was seemingly disabled from the crash, thus disabling the Goldion Hammer. The Zonder then destroyed GaoGaiGars right arm with seeker missiles after he tried Broken Magnum, thus disabling Hell and Heaven. However, Goldymarg endured without damage and shot EI-21 back down. It was then destroyed by GaoGaiGars Hammer Hell and Heaven.EI-22Weather Star Robo. Created by Pinchernone. The infected human was a weathergirl constantly criticized for inaccurate reports. As a typhoon swept over G-Island City, the Zonder was deduced as residing within a series of five tornadic waterspouts off the coast. The storm pinned down most of the support team elsewhere as it trapped GaoGaiGar between the waterspouts, until Goldymarg helped free him, with the Dividing Driver in tow. With the Dividing Field activated, the Zonders true form was revealed as a large star-shaped robot that could manipulate weather, mainly for spawning storms. Nonetheless, it was quickly bested by Broken Magnum and then Hammer Hell and Heaven.EI-23Sound Robo Alpha. Primardas infusion of Zonder Metal unto a loud ice-cream vendor who wasnt getting customers. Part of a pincer strike on the GGG. The result was one of two building like Zonders that emitted hypersonic waves that crippled all of the Mobile Units, by overloading their capacity of GS-Liquid, as well as the GGG tower. It was bested by Mic Sounders the 13ths Dazzling Double V (Disc M) attack before fusing with EI-24.EI-24Sound Robo Beta. Polonaises infusion of Zonder Metal unto a subway employee with a rough daily life. Part of a pincer strike on the GGG. The result was one of two building like Zonders that emitted hypersonic waves that crippled all of the Mobile Units, by overloading their capacity of GS-Liquid, as well as the GGG tower. It was bested by Mic Sounders the 13ths Dazzling Double V (Disc M) attack before fusing with EI-23. Unlike EI-23, EI-24 could also launch missiles from its body.EI-23/EI-24 CombinationA combination of EIs 23 and 24 that bears resemblance to a Zonder Metal Plant. Its hypersonic waves were stifled by Mic Sounders while the revived Mobile Team launched a collective strike, accumulating into GaoGaiGars Hammer Hell and Heaven, to which it retrieved both Zonder cores. This combination is sometimes referred to as the Hypersonic Zondar.EI-25SeaDart Robo. Result of Pinchernone and Pizzas infusion of the last of Pasders Zonder Metal into a young boy named Tohru, whose father had died in a storm at sea. Fused with his toy SeaDart hovercraft to create a Zonder Robo that fires missiles which shift all matter within the blast area to another dimensional space, as well as being able to traverse dimensions itself. This Zonder reverted to human form naturally without Purification being necessary, as a child host is apparently unable to sustain sufficient energy to power Zonder Metal.EI-30 through EI-71Zonder Robos created by Spine Primeval (ZX-05) from visitors to the Primeval-fused section of the Great Wall of China. All of them had basic EI abilities and were armed with an energy cannon on one of their arms. Initially emerged as independent entities to protect the Primeval from GaoGaiGars Goldion Hammer, all 42 Zonders later combined into a laser defense system. This system was destroyed with GekiRyuJins Xiang Tou Long, safely retrieving all Zonder Cores. It is later learned in the novel The King of Braves GaoGaiGar: Queen of Leo that a BioNet agent&mdash;one that Chasseur agent Renais Kerdif-Shishioh was pursuing&mdash;was among those Zonderized.EI-72Appears in the PlayStation videogame The King of Braves GaoGaiGar: Blockaded Numbers. Its core is Kohtaroh Taiga.EI-73Appears in the PlayStation videogame The King of Braves GaoGaiGar: Blockaded Numbers. Its core is Geki Hyuuma. Combines with EI-72.EI-72/EI-73 CombinationAppears in the PlayStation videogame The King of Braves GaoGaiGar: Blockaded Numbers. Absorbs the counter gravity shockwave generating Goldion Motor tool developed at NASA; is thus able to generate a field with which to counter the Goldion Hammers attack. Also held two decoy Zonder Cores in addition to its own (which GaoGaiGar was lured into retrieving during use of Hammer Hell and Heaven).The method in which it is destroyed varies, depending on path taken in the game:* By GaoGaiGar, using a special dual-core retrieval version of Hell and Heaven (whose motion is guided by the dolphin Valner from the previous scenario);* By King J-Der, wielding a Jewel Generator-enhanced Goldymarg as the Silverion Hammer, whose combined energies are able to break through the counter shockwave;* By GaoGaiGar, using the NASA-developed Grand Pressure tool;* By King J-Der, using the J-Quath twice in succession, only interrupted by a brief kick to EI-72/EI-73 before the second use of the J-Quath.EI-74Zonder Robo created through Arm Primevals (ZX-07) infusion of Zonder Metal into the producer of an television series. Fused with the Japanese BNB television station to broadcast his anime (GaGaGatchi) on all wavelengths around the world. This Zonder was created for the purpose of causing sensor interference in order to cover the escape of the surviving Primevals (ZX-07 and ZX-16 through ZX-31) to Jupiter. It lacked significant offensive and defensive capabilities as it was only armed with a pair of amchine guns on its body.  Despite these shortcomings, its sensor disruption ability was so great that not even Mamoru was able to detect its appearance.  It also kept the GGG mechanoids at bay by keeping hostages, including Hana Hatsuno. Most of the hostages were freed by the GGG mecha, except for Hana.  GaiGar spotted Hana, further preventing him from defeating the Zonder Robo until Mamoru came to assist.  Hana was freed shortly after by Mamoru as GaiGar initiated Final Fusion. EI-74 was destroyed by the use of Hammer Hell and Heaven, and Mamoru Purified the core in front of Hana to demonstrate his abilities and to converse with her about how he is an alien.ZonudaWhen EI-01 first crashed on Earth, it planted the seed of a New Machine Species within the nervous system of Mikoto Utsugi. Three years or so later&mdash;one month after the defeat of the 31 Primevals&mdash;this seed matured, transforming Mikoto into a new species of Zonder machine (Kikai Shinshishu). In this form, she absorbed all energy from and the GGG Orbit Base and escaped to Earth using one separated half of Division IV: Amaterasu. Upon landing, the New Machine Species converted it into a golden Zonuda Robot form that instantly mechanized any matter within a large radius through Matter Sublimation. It was defeated by Guy Shishioh and GaoGaiGar (having landed on Earth using the other half of Amaterasu, with the assistance of GGG and the Strongest Brave Robot Corps). Through a combination of Mamorus and Guys power, Mikoto was purified and she and Guy became Evoluders.Zonuda was able to revert to its standard form from Zonder Core form in a matter of seconds, and absorbed all energy and matter in range.  Only G-Stones were not mechanized by its Matter Sublimation, and it displayed the ability to absorb even GS-Ride energy.  In Zonuda Robo form, the radius of Matter Sublimation increased dramatically, and it possessed a nearly impenetrable Barrier System, invulnerable to the Goldion Hammer (which was mechanized upon GaoGaiGars attempt to use it).  This was only beatable once Mikoto managed to weaken the barrier from within Zonuda (shown as a scream on the show).  Zonuda was also able to counter Hell and Heaven using its palms, and could fire massive blasts of energy from the spike on its head.  Even GaoGaiGar was not immune to the effects of Matter Sublimation, resulting in the destruction of the entire Space Booster over the course of the fight and the mechanization of GaoGaiGar and Guy himself in the aftermath.ZonderiansPasder was the Terminal program of Heart Primeval (ZX-31), sent to invade Earth in 2003 as what the GGG identified as EI-01. Struck down from a preemptive orbital attack by Galeon, he crashed on the city of Yokohama, Japan. The initial impact on Mikoto Utsugis residence would cause a fire within which her parents were killed, the Utsugi residence was destroyed, and Utsugi herself fell unconsciousduring which time Pasder introduced a dormant, experimental Zonder organism into her biology.Pasder would then travel underground to the Eastabsorbing many types of machinery in the processand evade detection to situate itself beneath Tokyo Tower. There he would create a small Zonder Metal Plant within his body, commanding the Four Machine Kings to implant this metal into human subjects exhibiting stressful emotionthe most ideal condition in which the metal could mature and fulfill the Zonderian goal of total Earth mechanization. Padar appears on flat surfaces of the EI-01 vessel beneath Tower as a gruesome-seeming, ever-contorting face made of wires and circuitry, with lights for eyes.Upon defeat of the Four Machine Kings by GGG in 2005, Pasdar fully re-emerged from beneath Tokyo. This form bore a strong resemblance to Satan, as commented by GGG during the battle. As EI-01, Pasdar could fire reflecting beams of energy that were later used to create TenRyuJins Hikari to Yami no Mai, using all of the computers in Tokyo to calculate the angles, and had a Barrier System whose strength was only matched by the New Machine Species Zonuda. He drew in all of the citys electrical power in an attempt to return to space, but was destroyed by GaoGaiGar and the Strongest Brave Robot Corps under the influence of Projectile-X. Only a fragment carrying his program survived to reach orbit, absorbed by Pagliaccio to provide the 31 Primevals with intelligence on GGGs combat capacity. Pasder would ultimately return as part of the Z-Master itself when Pagliaccio was retrieved by Heart Primeval.Polonaise is one of the Four Machine Kings, assuming the form of a man dressed in old-fashioned clothing with a caterpillar-like engine of a locomotive for a head. In human form he resembled a train conductor. He was always smoking a pipe, which made the sound of a train whistle when blown. His Zonders tended to be train or subway-themed. He, along with Primada, helped power the growing Zonder metal plant during the Great Tokyo Upheaval by combining with Capital Circle Railway to make himself Zonderian Robo EI-28. Sped clockwise around the rail route to generate the energy used to create the Contra Fall and the Tokyo Zonder Metal Plant, in cooperation with EI-29. Their run was initially disrupted by GaoGaiGars use of the Goldion Hammer, which severely damaged both of them. However, EI-26 intervened, allowing the two Zonderian Robos to regenerate and continue their run. EI-28 was ultimately destroyed by ChoRyuJin, who used EI-29 to slam the two Zonderian Robos together to destroy them both, severely injuring both Zonderians and preventing them from returning to their perfect forms as Polonaise flees to Tokyo Tower after Primadas death. However, he was found and Purified by Mamoru, killed as a result. After Purification he resembled his human form but in Grecian clothing like that of the people of the Green Planet, but quickly dissolved into the air. His dialogue after Primadas death suggests they were married before becoming Zondarians.Primada Is the only female member of the Four Machine Kings, wearing as attire resembling traffic vehicle parts, with tires acting as skirt and shoulder decorations, annetna on her head, and headlights. Her human form resembles a ballerina, and she is often seen dancing around Pasders cave and her human victims. Her Zonders usually had something to do with motorized vehicles. During the Great Tokyo Upheaval she helped power the growing Zonder metal plant with Polonaise by fusing with Capital Circle Expressway to turn herself into Zonderian Robo EI-29. Sped counterclockwise around the length of the road to generate the energy used to create the Contra Fall and the Tokyo Zonder Metal Plant, in cooperation with Polonaise. Their run was initially disrupted by GaoGaiGars use of the Goldion Hammer, which severely damaged both of them. However, EI-26 intervened, allowing the two Zonderian Robos to regenerate and continue their run. EI-29 was ultimately destroyed by ChoRyuJin, who used his Power Crane and Ladder to slam her into EI-28 to destroy them both, severely injuring both Zonderians and preventing them from returning to their perfect forms as Primarda attempts to finish off the damaged ChoRyuJin, only to come into contact with the robots open GS Ride and be destroyed by the sudden contact with G-Stone energies. Her last words to Polonaise suggest that they were married before becoming Zonderized.Pizza was originally Red Planet cyborg Soldato J (#002). After his stalemate with Arm Primeval, Soldato was forced to retreat into the newly-created wastelands of his planet where he was found by the Zonderian Pinchernone, and converted into a Zonderian himself. Most of his memories as a Soldato Battalion cyborg were sealed in the process. As one of the Four Machine Kings, Pizza acts out plans that were aerial or airbone in nature, as well as personally involved in the missions, fighting Cyborg Guy.Prior to the final battle between the Four Machine Kings and GGG in Tokyo, Pizza fused with a transport called the HST as it landed at Haneda Airport, becoming the Zonderian Robo EI-26 to deter GGG and GaoGaiGar long enough for the Tokyo Zonder Metal Plant to complete. In this form, EI-26 had unmatched speed, which it used to great effect. Despite this advantage, however, GaoGaiGar was able to grapple it by surprise using thermals, allowing GaoGaiGar to attack with Broken Magnum at point blank range. This damage gave GaoGaiGar time to destroy the Zonderian Robo using the Goldion Hammer with Pizza narrowly escaping yet severely weakened. His final fight with Cyborg Guy prior to the re-emergence of EI-01 caused him to fully remember certain details of his past and purpose; this drove him to rebel against Pasder, saving Guy, Mamoru and Galeon while getting him critically wounded and in a near-death state.When the Arma assigned to him (who had since been found on Earth and adopted, having been given the name Ikumi Kaidou) had his memory restored prior to the re-emergence of EI-01, he sought out and performed Purification on Pizza, restoring Soldato Js own memory and true form.Pizza/Soldato Js character design is an obvious homage to Cyborg 002 from Ishinomoris 009 series.Pinchernone is Zonder-infected form of Tomoro 0117, the main computer of the J-Ark assigned to Soldato J #002. During the battle for the Red Planet, he was infected with Zonder Metal and turned into a Zonderian (though the J-Ark he had controlled remained somehow intact). Pinchernone would later hunt down Soldato J to ensure his own Zonderian conversion. Following the Red Planets mechanization, he served the Zonderian Pasder as one of the Four Machine Kings, acting in plans that are seaborne or maritime-themed, though several were also themed in childish and immature ways.He took the form of a small boat-shaped creature with a single yellow eye (this eye actually being Tomoro 0117s original form). His disguised human form was that of a short, purple-faced sailor with one yellow eye, who was always grinning and sitting on something. (He resembles Fukuzou Moguro of Warau Salesman to an extent.) He maintained Tomoros original crisp, high-pitched monotone as a voice, but his transformation to Zonderian form gained him a screeching, chattering laugh.Pinchernone was possessed of a childish personality, and harbored a vicious grudge against Volfogg following repeated defeats at his hand. During the final battle between the Four Machine Kings and GGG in Tokyo, Pinchernone drew Volfogg into the citys sewer system in an effort to attack him directly when he fused with a frigate to Zonderian Robo EI-27. Despite the power of Big Volfogg, EI-27 was able to destroy the two GunMachines and severely injure Volfogg by ripping off his arm. Volfogg however retaliates by remote controlling the Multidimensional Intelligence Submarine, with Entoujis help. The vehicle crashed into EI-27, prompting Pinchernone to absorb it, stating he could absorb any mechanoid that does not carry a G-Stone. However, this was a trap, and Entouji caused the Multidimensional Intelligence Submarines fusion core to go critical. Volfogg pinned the escaping Pinchernone using a boomerang before the vehicle ultimately self destructed.Both Volfogg and Pinchernone were seemingly destroyed in the explosion; however it was revealed both survived the blast. However, Pinchernones damage was so great that he did not have enough energy left over to regenerate when he was found by Arma, who purified Tomoro 0117 and restored his original program.Pagliaccio is a Terminal program of the Heart Primeval, deployed to act as the Primevals intelligence-gathering program and field commander. She assumes the form of hovering, doll-like pierrot, standing cruciform atop a balancing ball which can open and hold her collapsed humanoid form for high-speed travel. Speaks in a cold, droning monotone with barely noticeable traces of emotion. She appears after Pasder is destroyed, absorbing the remaining fragment him into herself when she arrives in Earth orbit, making her the recipient of his dormant program and all of his knowledge.She is retrieved by the core of Heart Primeval upon GGGs arrival at Jupiter, in preparation for Z-Master Fusion as she ultimately becomes part of the Z-Master itself. She is never directly identified (or even noticed) by any entity other than the Primevals themselves (who pay little attention to her outside of her orders).Black Soldato J (#019)Z-MasterThe Zonder Master Program, it appears as a giant with a (relatively) small discus embedded in the Z-Masters right palm featured a depiction of Pasders face on the left half and Pagliaccios on the right - the Z-Master appears to have spoken through this in an amalgamation of Pasders and Pagliaccios voices.Originally created by the denizens of the Purple Planet to relieve stress, Z-Master instead became the progenitor of the Zonderians. To carried out its goal across the cosmos after finishing Zonderizing the planet, the Z-Master splintered itself into the , each with a fragment of power that exceeding those of all converted Zonderians, able to develop Zonder Metal or Zondar Spores at will, and aside from basic zondar abilities can also perform Primeval Fusion with one another to increase their powers even further. The Primevals later arrive to Earth following the destruction of Pasdar, with most of those who invaded the Earth purified into a Zonder Crystal: a dormant component of the Master Program, appearing as an interlocking piece of a sphere-shaped object.The J Team gather the Zonder Crystals in hopes to that once all 31 are united, the Master Program can be destroyed while inactive. However, once only he and Heart remained, Arms interference brought about the rebirth of Z-Master, employing THE POWER from Jupiter to boost its abilities even further. The Braves manage to get into Z-Master, to overload THE POWER within Heart Primeval to destroy Z-Master from the inside-out.All Primevals are identified by GGG using the code ZX (Pronounced Zex and standing for Zonder Exceptional). Each Primeval is formally named for one body part as below, though most Primevals were not formally named in the television series; a complete list of names would appear later in official sources.Fist Primeval (ZX-01)First of a trio of Primevals to arrive on Earth, sent in advance of the main Primeval group to neutralize GGG. Took the shape of a large, red, circle with five claw-tipped fingers coming out of the sides and could emit red electricity from its body. Destroyed with King J-Ders J-Quath.Hair Primeval (ZX-02)Second of a trio of Primevals sent in advance of the main Primeval group.  Took the form of a mane of blue hair extending from a red cloak. Demonstrated the ability to reshape its hair into a drill, and shoot bits of hair like needles. Destroyed with the J-Quath. Hair Primeval, as part of the complete Z-Master, was extended into Jupiter in order to draw in vast amounts of THE POWER.Jaws Primeval (ZX-03)Third of the trio of Primevals to initially arrive on Earth. Very much resembled a golden set of dentures with sharp, gator-like teeth. It also had a tongue (on which the Zonder-crystal was located). It could bite through anything and was able to fire its teeth at targets like missiles. Damaged by the J-Quath, though a small section managed to escape. This portion was later sent to damage the Mic Force in an attempt to buy time for the other Primevals to arrive on Earth through an ES Window. The remainder of Jaws Primeval was pursued by the J-Ark and destroyed using J-Ders Plasma Sword.Legs Primeval (ZX-04)Fused with the American mining and research platform Explorer Seven, located in the Arctic Ocean. Attempted to reach the Pole in order to force a catastrophic inversion of the Earths magnetic field using massive electromagnetic manipulation. Defended itself using electromagnetism to generate Zero temperatures, creating massive mountains of ice. Its progress was halted by the revived Strongest Brave Robot Corps and was destroyed with GaoGaiGars Goldion Hammer.Spine Primeval (ZX-05)Fused with a large section of the Wall of China, transforming all 41 humans on the section into Zonders. Acting like a pump, it burrowed one end of itself 50 km into the earth, extending the other end out into space where it pumped magma in an attempt to attack the Orbital GGG Base. Its upper section was disintegrated with GaoGaiGars Goldion Hammer; its core then shifted to the section still within the Earths Mantle. This section was destroyed with a point-blank Maser Cannon shot fired by King J-Der.Brain Primeval (ZX-06)Fused with a Kazakhstan satellite rocket bound for orbit; once there, opened an ES Window onto the belt between Mars and Jupiter in an attempt to manipulate large asteroids through the ES window onto Earth with powerful telekinesis. Was also able to telepathically project strong psychic illusions into the mind of a subject and fire psychic energy from its body. Its psychic abilities were blocked by Mamoru Amami long enough for Star GaoGaiGar to use the Gatling Driver to bind its movement and destroy the Primeval with Hammer Hell and Heaven.Arm Primeval (ZX-07)One of the most known figures among the Primeval invaders, he plays the part of a noble warrior. Known in most forms for his gigantic right arm, capable of generating powerful gravity shockwaves from its biceps. He was first seen in armored humanoid form on the Red Planet to assist in its mechanization, where he was fought to a standstill by Soldato J (#002). This duel left an unresolved grudge between the two of them. Arm would later face Soldato J again, in a different time and place&mdash;the GGG Orbit Base, during his assault on it as leader of the Magnificent 7 Primevals. (To assist him with this task, he also fused with the US battleship BB-62 New Jersey as needs warranted.) As a last stand in that encounter,  he would escape to Earths Moon and perform Primeval Fusion with five of the remaining six Primevals in his group; this gambit would fail, although he managed to secure his own escape from Purification afterward.He soon reappeared in Egypt, having fused with an Egyptian pyramid (capable of scattering energy-absorbing micromachines) to form a Zonder Metal Plant, bringing Stomach Primeval (ZX-14) to assist him and performing Primeval Fusion with him when defeat seemed inevitable. This did not prevent a second defeat (through GouRyuJins Burning Hurricane and GaoGaiGars Goldion Hammer), though he managed to escape Purification a second time.Arms last stand would be in Jupiters orbit with the remaining active Primevals, having fused with Jupiters moon Europa. After being defeated yet again (by King J-Ders Ten-Linked Maser Cannons and J-Quath), he escaped yet again to fuse with Heart Primeval&mdash;taking his place as part of the complete Z-Master&mdash;and would ultimately be destroyed along with it. Strangely enough, Arm Primeval no longer demonstrated his gravity shockwave ability while fused to the Z-Master, though he is seen (in human form) emerging from the Z-Master with hundreds of Zonder Spores, which were thus launched through an ES Window to Earth.Nail Primeval (ZX-08)Took human form as one of the Magnificent 7 Primevals. Used his gigantic nails to slash through most types of material. Occasionally fused with the British attack submarine S107 Trafalgar. Destroyed by GaoGaiGar, the Mic Force, and King J-Der while in Primeval Fusion on the Moon.Ear Primeval (ZX-09)Took human form as one of the Magnificent 7 Primevals. He demonstrated the ability to control minds through special pins he could fire from his ears. He used this ability when attacking the Main Order Room to take control of the GGG Staff, but was thwarted by a sudden appearance of Mamoru and Galeon. Occasionally fused with the US carrier CV-62 Independence, he was destroyed by GaoGaiGar, the Mic Force, and King J-Der while in Primeval Fusion on the Moon.Eye Primeval (ZX-10)Took human form as one of the Magnificent 7 Primevals. Had an ability to predict enemy movement with an incredible degree of speed and accuracy; never actively participated in combat. Usually worked in conjunction with Arm Primeval. Occasionally fused with the Japan Self Defense Forces Kongo class destroyer DDG-174 Kirishima. Destroyed by GaoGaiGar, the Mic Force, and King J-Der while in Primeval Fusion on the Moon.Intestine Primeval (ZX-11)Demonstrated the ability to create a portable hole at the end of its extended intestinal tube. Took human form as one of the Magnificent 7 Primevals, using Kaidous foster mother as a host body (in addition to the US assault ship LHA-3 Belleau Wood). Her choice of host body caused Kaidou to hesitate in attacking her in their first encounter, where she held Mamoru Amamis unconscious friends hostage in an attempt to draw him out. As a last stand in that encounter, she would escape to the Moon and perform Primeval Fusion with five of the remaining six Primevals in her group; this gambit would fail, although she managed to secure her own escape from Purification afterward.She would next appear in Mexico (still possessing the body of Kaidous foster mother) in an attempt to form a Zonder Metal Plant. She was assisted by Nose Primeval (ZX-15) in this task, performing Primeval Fusion with him to increase her own strength against HyoRyu and RaiRyu. This would fail when GenRyuJin extracted Nose Primevals core, invalidating her Fusion; King J-Der would appear soon after and destroy her with a Kaidou-directed J-Quath.Rib Primeval (ZX-12)Took human form as one of the Magnificent 7 Primevals. Had the power of Atomic Disassembly, capable of controlled disintegration and displacement of any mass or energy. Occasionally fused with the Russian powered icebreaker Arktika. Destroyed by GaoGaiGar, the Mic Force, and King J-Der while in Primeval Fusion on the Moon.Primeval Fusion  	 Fusion of six of the Magnificent 7 Primevals (ZX-07 through ZX-12). Possessed all six of their abilities. Determined to be far greater in power than even that of EI-01. Primeval Fusion 1 was destroyed with a combined Mic Force assault focused through GaoGaiGars Gatling Driver Gravity Lens, followed by King J-Ders use of a simultaneous barrage of Anti-Meson and Maser Cannon.Liver Primeval (ZX-13)Took human form as one of the Magnificent 7 Primevals. Had the power of Reversal, capable of regeneration and reversion from Rib Primevals Atomic Disassembly ability. Occasionally fused with a military supply ship removed from a position off the coast of the Philippines. Destroyed in orbit by J-Ders Double Plasma Sword.Stomach Primeval (ZX-14)Fused with the Giza Sphinx to assist Arm Primeval (ZX-07) while he was in the process of generating a Zonder Metal Plant. Its only noteworthy ability was that it could spew exceedingly corrosive stomach acid. Arm later performed Primeval Fusion with it to defend himself against EnRyu and FuRyu. Its core would be extracted in this form with GouRyuJins Burning Hurricane.Nose Primeval (ZX-15)Fused with a Moai to assist Intestine Primeval (ZX-11) in Mexico while she was in the process of generating a Zonder Metal Plant. Intestine later performed Primeval Fusion with it to defend herself against HyoRyu and RaiRyu. Its core would be extracted in this form with GenRyuJins Thunder Blizzard.Wings Primeval (ZX-16)We only see Wings Primeval fused with one of Jupiters moons, resembling a closed pinecone. It demonstrated a similar ability to hair in that it fired needle-like projections to attack enemies. It was destroyed with GaoGaiGars Goldion Hammer, but later became part of (and died with) the Z-Master.Lungs Primeval (ZX-17)Fused with Jupiters satellite Ganymede. Created a Klein Space within itself (a parallel dimension whose internal structure is shaped similar to that of a bottle), used to seal away J-Der and GGG upon their arrival at Jupiter. Destroyed with King J-Ders J-Quath.Elbow Primeval (ZX-18)Knee Primeval (ZX-19)Destroyed with Broken Phantom.Foot Primeval (ZX-20)Destroyed with the Goldion Hammer.Neck Primeval (ZX-21)Breast Primeval (ZX-22)Torso Primeval (ZX-23)Hip Primeval (ZX-24)Genital Primeval (ZX-25)Destroyed by GenRyuJin and GouRyuJin.Kidneys Primeval (ZX-26)Shoulders Primeval (ZX-27)Bladder Primeval (ZX-28)Nerves Primeval (ZX-29)Muscles Primeval (ZX-30)Heart Primeval (ZX-31)The all-powerful leader of the 31 Primevals, the Z-Masters core. Created Pasder and Paglaccio to act as independent Terminal Programs - it appears that these two are actually the two halves of Heart itself. Spoke in an almost psychotically calm adult males voice. Possessed the ability to attack using waves of psychokinetic force (which could be blocked by The Power-enhanced Solitary Waves). Also used blood vessels which fired blasts of energy from their tips as an attack means - these were its weak point, as it was possible to enter one and thus attack Heart from within.Destroyed by an explosive release of THE POWER within the Primeval by King J-Der.BioNetProfessor LaplaceProfessor MoebiusProfessor MozumaShouGimletA general in the army of chaos, he has a metal cyborg body and is one of Bionets most obedient members.  Gimlet is a very skeletal cyborg, and consists entirely of metallic parts.  To hide his appearance, he sometimes wears a long cloak and a mask similar to that of a jester.  Uses the phrase that wont do incessantly.  Clashed with Guy in Hong Kong prior to FINAL, and steals one of the Q-Parts during Episode 1 of FINAL.  This leads to combat with GaoFighGar, where Gimlet fuses with the Q-Parts and dozens of identical reconfiguring machines to form the Gimlet Empereur.  This shapeshifting mechanoid is supposedly capable of using twenty-three special abilities, but only three are shown.*Explosion Rayon: Special ability number 1.  A laser fired from the Empereurs right arm after shifting into a cannon.  Easily blocked and returned by Protect Wall.*Colossal Combustible: Special ability number 2.  Gimlet Empereur forms a spire on each shoulder with electricity crackling between them - what this does is unknown, as Guy interrupts the attack (and, albeit temporarily, obliterates Gimlet Empereur) with Broken Phantom.*Substance Excusez-Moi: Special ability number 19.  Gimlet Empereur shifts into a tank and fires two large missiles.  These are each destroyed by a swift swing of the Goldion Hammer.Gimlet is summarily defeated, and soon thereafter killed, quite coldly, by Renais.Reprogrammed Repli-jinRepli-MamoruA clone created by the real Mamoru using the regeneration machine of the 11 Planetary Masters of Sol, he fought the Masters while the real Mamoru stole the PasQ Machine and escaped with it back to the Earth solar system. The clone was captured and reprogrammed by Palpalapa, then sent to retrieve the pieces of the PasQ Machine, which broke and fell to Earth during Pia Decems attack on Mamoru and Kaidou (Arma). During his mission, Repli-Mamoru used the friendship of the GGG members and Braves to his advantage at every turn, confusing Kaidou in their fight upon returning to Earth, tricking Mic Sounders into helping him steal the Q-Part possessed by GGG American Space Center, as well as manipulating the GGG crew to gain access to the Orbit Base to steal the last two Q-Parts. This continued during his escape attempt in Repli-GaiGar, making the GGG Braves drop their guard so he could escape capture. He was undone by Renais, who had no friendship with him, forcing him to Earth where Repli-Mamoru formed GaoGaiGar to battle Guy in GaoFighGar. Repli-Mamoru used Hell and Heaven to destroy the Goldion Hammer and badly damaged ChoRyuJin before being beaten by Guys Hell and Heaven. Even after losing, Repli-Mamorus friendship manipulating nearly let him kill Guy, but he himself was killed by Kaidou before he could succeed.Repli-Mamoru is physically identical to Mamoru, the only visible difference is the blue glow he casts in Latio form instead of the real Mamorus green, as well as his much paler appearance in human form. He possesses the same memories and desire to save the universe as the real Mamoru, but his purpose was twisted when changed by the 11 Planetary Masters of Sol. Even then his personality was similar, but Repli-Mamoru was willing to destroy and kill to accomplish his mission, blowing up the Chinese Scientific Aeronautics lab for one Q-Part and killing Papillon while gaining the final two. He also has the same powers as Mamoru, but using the restored PasQ Machine he could also perform Fusion with Repli-Galeon, forming GaiGar and GaoGaiGar with full use of their abilities.Repli-GaleonA clone created by the real Mamoru using the regeneration machine of the 11 Planetary Masters of Sol, he fought the Masters while the real Galeon was within the G-Crystal, awaiting his true programming to be restored by Mamoru. Like Repli-Mamoru, Repli-Galeon was captured by the Masters and reprogrammed by Failure Cain to accomplish their goal of retrieving the PasQ Machine on Earth.Repli-Galeon was summoned during Repli-Mamorus escape attempt from GGG Orbit Base, and with the aide of the PasQ Machine, performed Fusion with Repli-Mamoru to form GaiGar and linked with StealthGao II in attempt to escape. After evading HyoRyu, EnRyu, and Volfogg, he was shot down to Earth by Renais. After a short battle with GaoFar, he merged with the Q-GaoMachines to form GaoGaiGar, and demonstraited all of the abilities the original possessed while fighting GaoFighGar. Repli-Galeon was killed when GaoFighGars Hell and Heaven broke through GaoGaiGars attempt at the same attack.While physically similar, Repli-Galeon is easily identified by his lack of colors, as he is almost completely white, especially in lion mode. He possesses the same abilities as the real Galeon and GaiGar and is even able to apply the GaoMachines the same way as the original.Repli-Mobile UnitClones of HyoRyu, EnRyu, FuuRyu, RaiRyu, KouRyu, AnRyu, Volfogg and Mic Sounders the 13th created by Repli-Mamorus accidental use of the Pas-Q Machine to duplicate Earth, then reprogrammed by the Sol Masters.  Sent along with a mind-controlled Guy Shishio to fight King J-Der in orbit - however, they resisted the reprogramming and instead blocked the Goldion Hammer attack used by Guy at the cost of their own lives.The Repli-Jins looked identical to their counterparts, but with washed-out color schemes.Repli-GoldymargA clone of Goldymarg created by Repli-Mamorus accidental use of the Pas-Q Machine to duplicate Earth, then reprogrammed by the Sol Masters.  Equipped to Repli-GaoFighGar as the Goldion Hammer - however, he resisted the reprogramming and self-detonated, releasing a massive custom wave that destroyed all of the Repli-Carpenters as well as the entire replicate Orbit Base.  Oddly, Repli-GaoFighGar (which was next to the source) was not harmed by this.Repli-Goldymarg looked identical to the original Goldymarg, but with a washed-out color scheme.11 Planetary Masters of SolThe 11 Planetary Masters of Sol (11 Sol Jichi Yseishu) were the primary antagonists of the OVA sequel series King of Braves GaoGaiGar FINAL. They were a series of programs given material form&mdash;each powered by a Loud G-Stone&mdash;whose sole purpose was to restore the Tri-Star Solar System upon the destruction of the Zonder Master Program. However, much like the Z-Master, they had gone out of control and exceeded their original programming, using their matter-absorbing Pas-Q Machine to produce an entirely new universe that threatened to destroy the existing one in the process.  Each of the Sol Masters is a direct counterpart to one of the protagonists, some more obviously than others.PalparepaThe first of the 11 Masters to appear before GGG, and Guys counterpart in the Sol Masters.  The only one of the Sol Masters that does not appear to represent a planet. Program taking the form of a medical doctor with a large syringe mounted over his right forearm (which serves multiple purposes: bladed weapon, long-distance retrieval apparatus, neural manipulation tool) and a cylindrical apparatus mounted in place of his right eye that contains his Loud G-Stone. Can also sprout wings resembling those of a butterfly.Knowledgeable in the art of neurochemical manipulation: he personally reprogrammed the Repli-jin version of Mamoru Anami and at one point implanted Chemical Bolts into Evoluder Guy to manipulate his behavior.  He also created Paras Particles, particles which greatly relax nerve cells, and saturated Repli-Earth with them in order to isolate and destroy GaoFighGar.Palparepa can perform Chemical Fusion with a gigantic object resembling a molecule to form the mechanoid Palparepa Plus (though only Palparepa is said, the tech specs in Episode 7 of FINAL list the full name as Plus).  As opposed to the loud, fast-paced Final Fusion music, Chemical Fusion is accompanied by a soft, slow violin piece that is barely audible over the noise of the transformation.  Palparepa appears to control the mechanoid in an identical manner to that by which Guy controls GaoGaiGar, from a chamber of light within the Loud G-Stone on the right side of the mechanoids head.  This form is equipped with reconfigurable arms and six gigantic syringes (Doping Cylinders) mounted along its back, capable of detaching for independent attack. They can also connect in sequence to form God and Devil, Palparepas main weapon, or directly inject their contents into the mechanoid itself&mdash;evolving it into  Palparepa Prajna. This is a stronger version of Palparepa, which takes on a much more angular form than Palparepas former smooth design.  The cape previously worn is transformed into wings, which appears to grant Palparepa flight equal to that of Genesic GaoGaiGars Gadget Feathers.  While in this state Palparepa himself becomes more muscular, with thick veins spread across his body.  It also gains the ability to inject weakening Chemical Nanomachines into its target using snakelike tendrils from its back.  These are used to attack Evoluder Guy directly before he rewrites them and sends them back into Palparepa using his Evoluder abilities.At one point during his fight with Genesic GaoGaiGar (after the virus rewrite), Palparepa undergoes yet another transformation, gaining a nearly white glow and reverting to his former appearance within the mechanoid.  The cause of this change is unclear - however, Evoluder Guy demonstrated a similar color change when he was infected with the Chemical Nanomachines, suggesting that the effect of infecting Palparepa with them was similar to the Doping Cylinders.  This form (unnamed in any GaoGaiGar work to date) bears an even higher rate of regeneration than Prajna, and is and is capable of using stronger versions of all of Palparepa Prajnas abilities.  This form is stronger than Genesic GaoGaiGar (breaking Guys Straight Drill and Protect Shade) until Guy becomes enraged.Exhibits arrogant self-assurredness and an extreme complex; sees GaoFighGar (and, by extension, Genesic GaoGaiGar) as Devil.  The only person besides the narrator to indicate that Guy is the God of Destruction.  Scenes with Palparepa winning against Guy often include an image of God impaling the Devil on a golden sword.  In Palparepa Prajna, he becomes much less self-controlled, while in his final form his god complex becomes even more pronounced.Palparepa is destroyed in Shinjuku, Repli-Japan, when Prajna is destroyed in a fight scene that pays homage to both the first and last fights of the TV series.  His internal Loud G-Stone is then shattered by Evoluder Guys left hand.  Palparepa, along with all the Sol Masters save Pisa Sol and False Abel, is then replicated several dozen times by Pisa Sol. Several of these are destroyed by one shot from Genesic GaoGaiGars Bolting Driver, and the rest by the Goldion Crusher.  Any remaining Palparepas faded away with the destruction of Pisa Sol.Palparepas Chemical Fusion sequence was different in each of its appearances - the first had very different sound effects, which had a more alien tone to them, and the Loud G-Stone symbol on the head attachment was not made visible in this version (so as to add additional shock value near the end of Episode 4 of FINAL).  Palparepa himself also sounds more agitated when speaking his own name during the second rendition.PillnusNamed for the planet Venus.  Renaiss counterpart in the Sol Masters. Program taking the form of a masked humanoid dominatrix with a wasp-like stinger positioned on her lower back, and a large, cylindrical shaft bearing a needle in place of her left arm (which can double as a flamethrower). Bears a vague resemblance to the Zonderian Primarda; is often seen in the company of False Abel (some sources claim her to be False Abels bodyguard).  When not with False Abel, Pillnus is usually engaged in combat with Renais and J - during these fights she is usually accompanied by Pia Decem, whom she refers to as Shinigami-chan.Pillnus can shoot numerous metal chains out of her body at will, which are used to bind her targets and render them helpless. Pillnus can also fire a torrent of flame from her arm stinger, and can use her main stinger as an impaling weapon.  Any specific function included with the main stinger is unknownShe is possessed of sadistic cruelty, taking extreme amusement in the pain of others; especially enjoys torturing Renais Kerdif-Shishioh and Soldato J, taunting them about their apparent inability to completely defeat her.  Pillnus also likes to create pet names, calling Pia Decem Mister Death and Renais my kitty.Destroyed through a direct attack to her Loud G-Stone by Renais and Soldato J in Hyper Mode.  Pillnus was then replicated several dozen times by Pisa Sol; all of these faded away with its destruction.Pia DecemPossibly represents the dwarf planet Pluto (ninth planet back then), as a Death Figure, or the Tenth Planet (theoretical at the time of the series release) due to the name Decem, which is Latin for Ten.  Soldato Js counterpart in the Sol Masters.  Program taking a thin, black form vaguely resembling a scythe-wielding Reaper. Does not speak. Typically under False Abels direct command. Often seen within his ship, Pia Decem Pit, which is the counterpart to J-Ark.  Pit is based on an aircraft carrier, J-Ark on a battleship.  It attacks by launching a fleet of independent kamikaze fighter craft of three separate types. In action, these craft exhibit the same properties as weapons used by the J-Ark and King J-Der.  Pillnus refers to Pia Decem as Shinigami-chan, or Mister Death, and tends to appear alongside her when clashing with Soldato J and Renais.Arma (Ikumi Kaidou) is later installed as Pia Decem Pits computer core by False Abel, connected in such a way that all damage sustained by the ship is routed directly to Armas body. This was done to deter any attack from Soldato J.On False Abels orders, Pia Decem is capable of performing Giga Fusion with Pia Decem Pit to form the gigantic mechanoid Pia Decem Peak.  Pia Decem controls Peak from a kneeling position atop Pits Loud G-Stone.  The Giga Fusion sequence involves a detachment and reattachment of a portion of Pia Decem Pit that appears similar to the J-Bird.  Judging by its appearance and Giga Fusions numerous parallels to Mega Fusion, this section might be capable of transforming into a form similar to J-Der, but this is otherwise unsubstantiated.  This form was destroyed in Los Glaciares, Repli-Argentina with a point-blank attack to its Loud G-Stone using King J-Ders Ten-Linked Maser Cannons.  Pia Decem Peak was then replicated several dozen times by Pisa Sol - all of these faded away with its destruction.False AbelAlso spelled as Palus Abel. Program made in the image of the Red Planets leader, Abel; possibly named for the Solar Systems own Red Planet, Mars.  Ikumi Kaidous counterpart in the Sol Masters. Assumes an active command and leadership role with regard to the other Masters of Sol. Usually seen aboard Pia Decem Pit, accompanied by Pillnus.Has telekinetic powers of flight and shielding similar to that of Failure Cain, Arma and Latio. Also bears a number of expanding energy firearms within her chest, revealed only when her cloak is spread.Is childish in nature, bearing a childs cruelty; seems to treat the 11 Masters fight against GGG as a game.The only one of the Sol Masters to not be killed directly by GGG at any point, and the only one not replicated multiple times by Pisa Sol.  Faded away with the destruction of Pisa Sol.Failure CainAlso spelled as Pei La Cain. Possibly named for the Earth, Terra/Gaia.  Mamorus counterpart in the Sol Masters. Program made in the image of the Green Planets Protector: Mamorus father, Cain. Has telekinetic abilities similar in strength to Latio/Mamoru, and displays the ability to perform the same Hell and Heaven technique that Mamoru used in the series.  Failure Cain is only differentiable from the true Cain by the inversion of the G-Stone symbol on his forehead, as well as in the background when he performs Hell and Heaven.Possesses at least as much knowledge as the man he was based upon, as he oversaw the successful reprogramming of Repli-Galeon. However, much unlike Cain, his personality seems bereft of any sincere kindness.Similar to Cain, he is capable of performing Fusion with Galeon, and attempted to do so at one point; this attempt failed when it was revealed that Galeon knew to recognize Evoluder Guy as the true hero.Destroyed in Repli-Earth orbit through Purification by Mamoru Anami.  Several dozen replicas of Failure Cain attempted to stop Genesic GaoGaiGar using the Goldion Crusher from reaching Pisa Sol with J-Arks ES Missiles, but failed.  All of said replicas faded away with the destruction of Pisa Sol.Pisa SolNamed for Sol (the Sun). Counterpart in GaoGaiGar is unclear - likely either Mikoto Utsugi or Goldymarg is Pisa Sols counterpart, the former being more likely because of her ability to regenerate.  Performs Fusion with the 11 Masters Regeneration Machine (disguised as Repli-Earths sun, and using the Pas-Q Machine as its backbone circuit) in order to assume direct control of it during their fight against Genesic GaoGaiGar. She does not actively participate in combat.Destroyed with the Goldion Crusher as wielded by Genesic GaoGaiGar.  This causes everything created as a result of the Pas-Q Machine to fade away, and returns the dark matter it stole to the universe.PercurioNamed for the planet Mercury.  Mic Sounders the 13ths counterpart in the Sol Masters. Fought in London, Repli-England. Program taking the form of a thin, oblong creature with a musical horn for a head in a white tuxedo, accompanied by a hovering metronome constantly in motion (which is also used as a secondary weapon). Stands atop BluBalloon, a large, hovering, whale-like object seemingly made from parts of musical instruments. Attacks using extreme sound manipulation (produced from many hovering PoshuPoshu speaker pods and played as swing music) capable of ravaging and shattering matter on a gigantic scale.First destroyed by Disc F, and again, after regenerating, through Solitary Wave manipulation (via the suspension wires on Londons Tower Bridge) by Mic Sounders the 13th.  Percurio was then replicated several dozen times by Pisa Sol; all of these faded away with its destruction.P-VaterNamed for the planet Jupiter.  ChoRyuJins counterpart in the Sol Masters, and the only one for whom the dualism is not obvious. Fought at the Taj Mahal in Repli-India. Program taking the form of a humanoid combat mecha with a second pair of long, multi-segmented arms (equipped with rotating chainsaw blades) mounted on its back, agile enough to deflect energy blasts as well as strike an enemy. Also holds a weapon in its right hand capable of a forward-projecting, localized shockwave.First destroyed by a full-barrage of ChoRyuJins Ul-tech beams and again, after regenerating, by HyoRyu and EnRyus combined Supernova attack.  P-Vater was subsequently duplicated several times by Pisa Sol; all of these faded away with its destruction.PolturnNamed for the planet Saturn. Fought in Vladivostok, Repli-Russia.  Volfoggs counterpart in the Sol Masters, Polturn resembled a tall, dark-armored samurai. Polturn used two swords under his complete control, and could spin like a top, similar to Big Volfoggs Daikaiten Daimadan.  Also displayed the ability to take control of GunDober and GunGlue.First overpowered by Big Volfogg, until the gunmachines were manipulated, then destroyed through a direct attack to his Loud G-Stone with one of Volfoggs boomerangs and Melting Siren after being tricked by him and Kit Number 08(a hologhraphic image producer).  Polturn was then replicated several dozen times by Pisa Sol; all of these faded away with its destruction.PuranusNamed for the planet Uranus.  TenRyuJins counterpart in the Sol Masters. Fought in Athens, Repli-Greece. Capable of flight. Carried a clear shield and a lance-like weapon containing missiles and beam weapons (Given that its beams were reflected and refracted by TenRyuJins Hikari to Yami no Mai, they might be the same as Primerose Moon.)  Also possessed a pair of chest-mounted lasers that were capable of slicing through TenRyuJins armor instantaneously and could be fired in sweeps - these were used to slice off TenRyuJins arms and weapons.First destroyed by TenRyuJins Double Nail Fire and again, after regenerating, through KoRyu and AnRyus combined Internal Projectile-X.  Puranus was then duplicated several dozen times by Pisa Sol; all of these faded away with its destruction.PtuloneNamed for the planet Neptune. GekiRyuJins counterpart in the Sol Masters, the most blatantly so.  Resembled a cross between a mechanical jellyfish and a pair of lungs. One tentacle was equipped with a large fan, the other a massive electromagnet. Fought in Sankyuu, Repli-China. Controlled wind and electromagnetism, as well as the weather.First destroyed by GekiRyuJins Shung Tu Lng and again, after regenerating, with a compact and robust self-destruct device.  Ptulone was then replicated several dozen times by Pisa Sol; these faded away with its destruction.UncategorizedYupitosSee also*King of Braves GaoGaiGar glossary*(GaoGaiGar)*in The King of Braves GaoGaiGar
4317985
Crofts_End_Church
Crofts End Church is a nonconformist church, located in George, Bristol, England. The specific area in which it is located is known locally as Crofts End.Formerly known as The Miners Mission and Crofts End Mission, the church was established in 1895 by a young miner, George Brown, who felt called by God to start a Christian work for the many poor, ragged and barefooted children of the area.  The church is now part of the Bristol City Mission Society, a registered charity.The full history of the church can be found in a booklet published in 1995 for its centenary year. Collated and edited by Margaret Mitchell it includes memories of Crofts End and historical details of life in a mining community, from people across the country.Groups that use the premises include Bright Hour - a weekly Bible group, Just Hangin Out - an activity group for children who attend Crofts End, Second Chance Friday - an all-age Bible study group, X-Life - a youth house group, Croft Tots - a mums and toddlers group, Wednesday Specials - a childrens group for 6s to 10s, X-Cite - a youth group for 9s to 12s, Crofts End Silver Band - a brass band for all ages, The Vets Band - a brass band for older players, and Players, an amateur theatre group.The current pastor is Andrew Yelland. See also * in BristolExternal links* http://www.croftsend.org
4324325
Athi_River_(town)
Athi River is a town outside Nairobi, Kenya in Eastern Province.  It is also known as Mavoko.  The town hosts Mavoko municipal council and headquarters of Mavoko division which is part of the District.  It has an urban population of 22,000 and a total population of 48,260 (1999 census(Kenya National Bureau of Statistics: Population of local authorities)), and is relatively industrialised, including a major cement factory run by River Mining.  The town is also a growing residential area due to its proximity to the capital. Transport Athi River has a railway station built in 1920 along the Mombasa - Nairobi line. The University has a campus in the town. The town is named after Athi, the first part of the Athi-Galana river system.Athi River town is adjacent to and three kilometers from Kitengela town, but is part of the Machakos District in Eastern Province, while Kitengela belongs to District in the Valley Province.Mavoko carved off the Nairobi County Council in 1963, when the latter was disbanded. Mavoko municipality has six wards (Athi River West, Katani, Kinanie/Mathani, Makadara, Muthwani and Sophia). All these wards belong to Kathiani constituency, which has a total of ten wards. The remaining four wards are within Masaku County Council.(Electoral Commission of Kenya: Registration centres by electoral area and constituency) See also * stations in Kenya References * Nation, August 21, 2000: Town touched by tragedy External links * Mavoko municipal councilRiverRiver
4336092
Sierra_Gorda
The Sierra Gorda is an ecological region centered on the northern third of the state of Quertaro and extending into the neighboring states of Guanajuato, Hidalgo and Luis Potos.() Within Quertaro, the ecosystem extends from the center of the state starting in parts of San Joaqun and de Montes municipalities and covering all of the municipalities of Peamiller, de Amoles, de Serra, de Matamoros and Arroyo Seco, for a total of 250 km2 of territory.()() The area is extremely rugged with high steep mountains and  deep canyons. As part of the Karst, it also contains many formations due to erosion of limestone, especially caves known locally as stanos. The area is valued for its very wide diversity of plant and animal life, which is due to the various microenvironments created by the ruggedness of the terrain and wide variation in rainfall. This is due to the mountains blocking of moisture coming in from the Gulf of Mexico, which generally makes the east side fairly moist and the west semiarid scrub brush. Most of the region has been protected in two biosphere reserves, with the one centered in Quertaro established in 1997 and the one centered in Guanajuato established in 2007. The Sierra Gorda is considered to be the far west of the Huasteca region culturally and it is home to the Missions in the Sierra Gorda Heritage Site.RegionThe region is on a branch of the Madre Oriental mountain range and consists of a series of mountain chains that run northwest to southeast,( formed 240 million years ago.() Most are made of limestone, formed by sea beds from the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods. Later there were intrusions of volcanic rock, especially in the eastern portion in Hidalgo state,(( from which come the mineral deposits of the area. The limestone has been affected by erosion to form the Huasteca Karst, and the area contains a large number of caverns, and pit caves (stanos), some of which extend for hundreds of meters in depth.(() All of the Sierra Gorda is marked by very rugged terrain, which includes canyons and steep mountains. Altitudes range from just 300 meters above sea level in the Ro Santa Mara Canyon in Jalpan to 3,100 m asl at the Cerro de la Pingica in Pinal de Amoles.(() The most important elevation in the Hidalgo area is the Cangandh which has an altitude of 2,820 m asl.( Rainfall also varies greatly from 350 mm to 2,000 mm per year. The micro-environments of the region range from conifer forests, oak forests, mostly found on mountain peaks, banana and sugar cane fields in the deeper canyons. On the east side, there are deciduous forests. On the west side, bordering the Plateau, there are desert and semi desert conditions, with a variety of cacti and arid scrub brush. Among its mountains are the peaks associated with the Alta de Hidalgo, the pine forests of Zamoarano, the Canyon and the slopes of the Huazmazonta, the inter-mountain valleys where the five missions are found and the rolling hills leading into Huasteca. The wide variations of altitude and rainfall favor a wide variety of flora and wildlife.((There are three main rivers in the Sierra Gorda, all of which are part of the River basin. These are the Santa Mara River, the or Peamiller River and the River. All three pass through deep canyons and tend to form borders between the states and municipalities of the region. Santa Mara marks part of the border between Quertaro and Luis Potos, and the Moctezuma River marks part of the border between Quertaro and Hidalgo. The Tula and Moctezuma Rivers meet in the Sierra Gorda of Hidalgo. Here, the Moctezuma River Canyon extends for twelve km and rises 480 meters above the floor.((The climate of the region depends on altitude and the fact that the mountains form a natural barrier against the prominent source of moisture, the Gulf of Mexico. The east side of the mountains gets significant more rainfall than the west, as the altitude extracts moisture from the clouds. Forests and even rainforests are found in the east, while the west is dominated by desert and near desert conditions. In the east, mornings in the high mountain areas usually bring cloud cover and fog.( The most moisture falls in the northeastern edges of the regions, where it merges into La Huasteca proper, in San Luis Potos and Hidalgo.() In the entire region, the coldest temperatures occur between December and January, with high temperatures in April and May. Temperatures vary widely depending on altitude with an annual average of 13C in the higher elevations such as Pinal de Amoles to 24C in lower areas such as Jalpan. In the highest elevations, frosts and freezes are not uncommon.(() In 2010, the Sierra Gorda had it first significant snowfall in eighteen years in the municipality of Pinal de Amoles, with temperatures of -4C. In some places, the cover was 15 cm deep.()The Sierra Gorda has one of the diverse ecologies in Mexico, with one of the largest number of species of plants and animals. Species in danger of extinction include the Jaguar, Puma, the black bear, the green parrot, the Veracruz partridge, and the butterfly, mostly due to human activities. Endangered plant species include the biznaga gigante (platyacanthus), the chapote (riojae), the guayam (guatemalensis), the magnolia (dealbata) and the peyote (diffusa).() Monarch butterflies can be found in the area as well, as they pass through to their wintering grounds on the State of Mexico-Michoacn border .() There have been plagues in the forests of the area due to the recent drought conditions. The most serious is a bark beetle (adjunctus) and mistletoe (Arceuthobium sp.). The drought conditions have been blamed on global climate change.() Areas in Quertaro and Guanajuato have been declared as biosphere reserves. The Sierra Gorda in Hidalgo has not, but it still contains a large number of important ecosystems.(Poverty levels are high in the area despite the ecological and cultural richness.( A number of indigenous communities still inhabit the region. The eastern part in Hidalgo is dominated by the Otomi .() The far north of Quertaro still has significant communities of Pames, and Guanajuato has a number of Chichimeca groups. Tourism has been a recent phenomenon here, as the areas ecological importance becomes more widely known.()In Japlan de Serra, there is a museum dedicated to the history and geography of the Sierra Gorda region. The museum building was first constructed in 1576 as a fort and military outpost. It was reconstructed at the end of the 16th century. It was remodeled in 1990 and was inaugurated as a museum in 1991, with a collection of pieces that range from the pre Hispanic era to the Reform War. It has eight halls for exhibits, a bookstore, an audiovisualroom, a temporary exhibit hall, research center and library. It organizes educational, ecological and cultural events.()There is an annual cycling event called Escalera del Infierno (Hells Ladder) which extends over the Sierra Gorda in Quertaro in March. The event begins in Bernal, through Ezequiel Montes, Cadereyta and ends in San Joaqun, for 137 km, 28 km of which are uphill.()Biosphere reservesThere are two major conservation areas in the Sierra Gorda region: one in Quertaro and one in the state of Guanajuato.Biosphere reserve in QuertaroThe Sierra Gorda Biosphere in Quertaro was established by decree on 19 May 1997 because of its exceptional variety of species and ecosystems.( The reserve extends for about 400,000 hectares over the states of Quertaro and Luis Potos .( It covers about 32% of the state of Quertaro and is roughly the size of Island .() When it was declared, the reserve had 683 communities with about 100,000 inhabitants.()() However, since then, the population has nearly dropped to about half.() In Quertaro, the biosphere reserve encompasses the municipalities of de Serra, de Matamoros, Arroyo Seco, de Amoles (88% of its territory) and Peamiller (69.7% of its territory) .( The biosphere was declared as a result of grassroots efforts, the only one to be established this way in Mexico. The original declaration encompasses 383.567 hectares.(}) In 2001, it was added to the International Networks of Man and Biosphere of UNESCO as the thirteenth Mexican reserve on the list, occupying first place in regards to ecodiversity.( It is also recognized as a rea de Importancia para la Conservacin de las Aves (Area of Importance for the Conservation of Birds) by the Consejo Internacional para la Preservacin de las Aves Mexicanas.(The reserve begins in the dry semi desert areas in the center of Quertaro and as one moves north and higher into the mountain peaks of de Amoles at around , the scenery changes to temperate forest of conifers. Altitude lowers north into Jalpan and the climate is warmer and wetter before moving into the rolling hills of the La Huasteca in San Luis Potos and Hidalgo.() The ecosystems of the reserve are found at altitudes between 350 to 3,100 meters above sea level, with rugged mountains, canyons, lush valley and stanos or caves carved out from the limestone of the Karst .(( Humidity is primarily from the of Mexico, which makes the northeast of the region green, but the southwest, blocked from the moisture by the high mountains, is dominated by arid scrub brush.() This combination of varying altitude and moisture patterns creates the regions primary biological characteristic, which is a large number of ecosystems in a relatively small area.( It has 15 vegetative types, including old growth moist montane forests covered in bromeliads and orchids, high elevation pine-oak forests, a great diversity of cactus, Wild Oregano and lowland tropical forests .( The biosphere is the seventh largest federally protected natural area and has the greatest biodiversity of all of them, including those which encompass marine areas,( as it is home to 10 of Mexicos 11 ecosystems.(The diversity of the area can also be seen in the number of plant and animals species found in the reserve. There are 2,308 species of plants, .(() with about thirty five percent of the area covered by forested areas of oaks, junipers and pines.( There are 130 mammal, 71 reptile and 23 amphibian species, including six feline species, the black bear (americanus) the spider monkey (hybrius). There are 360 species of birds, more than 30 percent of the bird species in the country including green parrots (militaris) .(( Migrating monarch butterflies pause here on their southern route,( and butterfly species in general total more than all that are in the U.S. and Canada combined.( Many of these species are endangered, and many have not yet been studied.(The biosphere reserve in Quertaro is jointly managed by Comisin Nacional de reas Naturales Protegidas of Semarnat along with the Grupo Ecolgico Sierra Gorda (GESG) .( GESG, a private grassroots organization, was founded in 1987 in order to conserve the area and allow for sustainable development for the areas population as well.((  The group worked to have the area declared a biosphere reserve, the first such reserve to be established by grassroots efforts in Mexico.( The management system is a combination of federal authorities working with the participation of local communities.( The land is generally not owned by the government. Thirty percent of the reserve is communally owned land with the rest privately owned, with the government issuing regulations.(() Cooperation between federal authorities and local communities has not always gone smoothly, with local residents complaining that the government has issues decrees without consulting them.(  The CESG and the biosphere project have attracted international support from sponsors such as the Foundation, Shell, Wal-Mart, Hewlett-Packard, Bimbo and nongovernmental organizations such as Ashoka, conservation foundations and U.N. agencies.((( The Grupo Ecolgico Sierra Gorda was one of 94 winners of the Energy Globe competition among 700 entrants. It received 10,000 Euros to help fund its projects.() Conservation of the area has also attracted the attention of people such as director Cameron, who sponsored a reforestation project on 120 hectares.() This is in addition to various other reforestation projects that have been ongoing since the 1990s.(( These projects even include an overall forest management plan designed to produce enough wood for local woodcutters to earn a living.(Biosphere reserve in GuanajuatoMuch of the Sierra Gorda region which extends into the state of Guanajuato was declared a biosphere reserve in 2007 to preserve its biodiversity as well.  In this state, protected area covers 236,882 hectares with is the entire municipality of Xich, 70% of Victoria, 65% of Atarjea, about a quarter of Luis de la Paz and a small portion of Santa Catarina.()(<Jimenez Gonzalez, p. 65) The reserve here is divided into a nucleus, which is in the municipalities of Victoria, Ajarjea and Xich, and a periphery. Only eco tourism, research activities, traditional economic activities and low impact development is allowed in the nucleus.(This section of the Sierra Gorda is home to eighty four species of plants from trees to cactae, 182 species of birds and 42 species of mammals.( The rugged terrain means that there are a wide number and variety of microclimates although average temperatures vary only between 16 and 19 C. It lowest point is a canyon called Paso de Hormigas in Xich at 650 meters above sea level with a very warm climate suitable for tropical fruit. The highest point is de Zamorano at 3,300 meters, followed by El Picacho de Pueblo Nuevo, El Zorillo and El Cuervo all above 2,700 meters. The largest changes are seen in arid versus wetter zones, which can often be relatively nearby, with foliage changing from rainforest to pine forest to desert landscapes.(Jimenez Gonzalez, pp. 6465) The area is the poorest in Guanajuato, with over 200 communities which have a population of less than 150.( This area is the most rugged in the state where most of the natural areas and small villages are remain intact due to their inaccessibility.(Jimenez Gonzalez, p. 51) Culturally, the Sierra Gorda region is the far western part of Huasteca, which extends over parts of the states of Quertaro, San Luis Potos, Hidalgo and Veracruz.(<Jimenez Gonzalez, p. 65)Conservation challengesThe most important conservation problem is that the area is the second most populated natural protected area in Mexico,( with severe problems with poverty.( This creates a need to balance conservation efforts with local subsistence needs.(( One important aspect of this is to manage forest resources so that local woodcutters can make a living while controlling how much is cut.( However, mass migration out of the region has almost halved the population of the Quertaro biosphere to about 50,000 people since it was declared. This has taken pressure off of local natural resources, as agriculture, livestock production and logging lessen. Many of the people who have left are in the United States and send money back home. This money has spurred the building of larger homes and the proliferation of pick up trucks, many with U.S. license plates. It has also allowed for the change to gas over firewood for cooking, but garbage has become a problem. However, overall the depopulation has been positive for the recuperation of the biosphere.((Despite the lessened pressure, economic activities still take a toll on the area. Illegal logging is still a very serious problem, as the area has attracted loggers from outside.(() The problem is most serious in de Matamoros, de Amoles and de Serra .( Aside from commercial loggers, areas are also cleared by local farmers looking for more space for animals and crops. This has led to springs and river drying up and eroding of topsoil. While strict environmental protection laws exist, enforcement is lacking.( Local authorities have requested the creation of environmental police to guard the forest areas.(  However, much of the enforcement is done by the local community itself.(Lastly, there have been problems with droughts and pest infestations. These include the pine beetle, mistletoe and caterpillars. Some residents see the event as divine will but others place global warming. It is not know how much of the oaks, junipers and pines that make up most of the forested areas have been compromised but there are visible yellow patches seen in the otherwise green forest. The pests have been able to infest more because trees are weak due to drought conditions.()Efforts to help the local community preserve the area and make a living primarily consist of payouts to landowners who conserve and eco-tourism. Recently, the federal government along with the Nations, began a program to pay private land owners for environmental services of between 18 and 27 US dollars for each hectare they conserve each year. However, this only covers about 215 landowners and 21.500 hectares, 5.6% of the total reserve.( The second is the promotion of tourism based on the areas natural resources. One organization dedicated to this is Sierra Gorda Ecotours.(Sierra Gorda de HidalgoThe Sierra Gorda in Hidalgo has not been declared a biosphere reserve, but it still contains a large number of important ecosystems.( It is mountainous with a wide variety of ecosystems like other parts of the Sierra Gorda, but this area has a greater percentage of the volcanic rock when entered the area late in its geological history.( The terrain is very rocky and difficult to travel.( The most important elevation in the Hidalgo area is the Cangandh which has an altitude of 2,820 masl,(  located in the Sierra Alta de Hidalgo,( The area is marked by the Moctezuma and Rivers. The first contains a canyon which is 480 meters deep. The border between Hidalgo and Quertaro is marked by where the Moctezuma and Tula Rivers meet. This area is also home to one of the largest hydroelectric dams in Mexico.(The Sierra Gorda of Hidalgo roughly divides into an arid south and a north filled with forests. In both areas, days are significantly warmer than the nights. The north contains forests of pine, ocote, oaks, junipers and other trees. The south is more arid and much of it is scrub brush.( This part of the Sierra Gorda, especially the south, is dominated by the Otomis, rather than the Huasteca or Chichimeca. The most important city is Zimapn. Agriculture is limited to corn grown during the rainy season but yields are poor due to the lack of flat lands and fertile soil. Agriculture also increases erosion. More important to the economy is mining, with minerals such as lead, zinc, magnesium, silver and stone such as marble and opals.(higalgogob)DemographicsWhile indigenous people make up a very small percentage of the population of the region, the Huasteca culture has had a strong impact since the pre Hispanic period. Most of the region is considered to be at least nominally the far western part of this cultural region.(<Jimenez Gonzalez, p. 65) Huapango is the dominant native musical and dance style in the Sierra Gorda, with festivals dedicated to it in Xich, de Amoles, San Joaqun, where Huasteca influence is strongest.() Most of the population lives in very small rural communities, many under 500 inhabitants.(( There are no notable social conflicts in this area, which is free of problems related to the illegal drug trade that afflict other parts of the country.(Most still make a living from agriculture, livestock and mining and in some areas, these traditional economies are protected by law.((( However, the extreme poverty of the area has forced many, especially younger residents, to migrate to seek employment. This has led to many areas becoming dependent on remittances sent back home, much of it from the United States. In some areas, one in four households is supported by remittance money.(Major communitiesde Serra is in the north of Quertaro. It is called the heart of the Sierra Gorda in part due to is geographic location in the city and the fact that it is the only city in the biosphere.( Jalpan is closely surrounded by mountains, with cobblestone streets around the very center. Mornings frequently are foggy or cloudy, with the sun burn such off by midday.( Ecotourism and tourism related to the five Franciscan monastery declared a World Heritage Site have recently become an important part of the economy. The Jalpan Dam has become important as a habitat for aquatic birds.(Xich, in the state of Guanajuato, was founded in 1585 as a mining town, with the municipality containing a high elevation at Cerro El Descarado, at 2,400masl and a low elevation where the Santa Mara River and the Xoconoxtle meet at 826 masl, the lowest in the state. It has a population of over 11,000 people and although very few are indigenous, Huasteca influence is notable.()Zimapn is the largest city in the Hidalgo portion of the Sierra Gorda. Unlike other parts of the Sierra Gorda, this area has been dominated by the Otomi, with the Spanish city founded in 1522. It is primarily a mining center, extracting various metals and stones from the steep mountains that surround it. The municipality has a fairly significant number of indigenous language speakers; over 3,000 in a total population of about 34,000.()HistoryHuman settlements in the area have been dated to between 6,000 and 4,000 years ago, in the southern part of the region, with the earliest found in the far south of the area in what is now the municipality of de Montes, in an area called the Mesa de Len.( The earliest inhabitants here hunter-gatherers; however over time, many developed sedentary agricultural villages by the end of the Pre Classic period .(( The development of these villages was bolstered by migration of agricultural peoples from the Plateau and the of Mexico coast, especially from the latter.( Agriculture was concentrated in the lower valley areas, the few plains and some sides of mountains. This also included the cutting of forests to make more agricultural land. Most settlements are found near springs, ponds and small lakes as they were the most readily usable sources of water, instead of the rivers which ran deep inside narrow canyons.( This included the Huastecas, who were found mostly in the far northeast of the region, noted for growing cotton.(The height of settlement of the area came between the 6th and 10th centuries, with the largest number of successful human settlements, with an economy based on farming and mining.( During this time, the area saw intense commercial traffic and cultural exchanges between of Mexico, the Huasteca area and the Plateau, with artifacts related to Ro Verde in San Luis Potos, Teotihuacan, Tula, west to the Bajo and from the valleys of Quertaro and San Juan del Ro all found.( However, the peoples of the Sierra Gorda had more ties with peoples to the west, north and east, than with the Plateau to the south.( This is when the cities of Ranas and Toluquilla grew. The two cities economies were based on the control of trade routes and mining of cinnabar, used as a red pigment. The mining of cinnabar required coordinated and hierarchical labor practices for the various tasks involved, which would led to the development of these cities. This area was the primary provider of red pigment to Mesoamerica .( Between 200 and 1000 CE, the area was culturally divided into three regions, Ro Verde, the Serrana Cultura and the Huasteca.( The Ro Verde region is located in the northwest of the state of Quertaro into San Luis Potos. The Serrana Culture is found around the archeological sites of Las Ranas and Toluquilla, which dominated most of the trade routes, and had the greatest population during the Classic Period (200-900CE). The Huasteca region is in the far northeast with major settlements at Tancoyol, La Campana, Tancama and Tonatico, which had fertile lands. The Otomi arrived in the area in 800 CE and settled peacefully.(The development of cities and dominions came to a halt in the 11th century, after being in decline for over 300 years before that. During the Post classic (900-1521) all of the areas cities in Quertaro would become abandoned. There are two theories as to why this occurred. The first is that there was climate change during this time, which caused the area to dry out. The second was that it was due to social phenomena, as a number of cities in Mesoamerica, including Teotihuacan went into decline. Eventually the cities of the Sierra Gorda were abandoned altogether, but this may have been gradual.  Evidence at Las Ranas and Toluquilla indicate a non violent transition, as farming communities were abandoned and replaced by hunter-gatherer communities.((The hunter gatherer cultures that moved in from the 11th century remained until the colonial period, and were categorized together as Chichimecas. These consisted in various ethnicities including Pames, Ximpeces Guachichils and Jonaz. All speak languages in the Oto-Manguean family, with differences mostly cultural. The Pames were found mostly in the east with the Jonaz in the west. In addition, there were also groups of Otomis and Huasteca to be found.((The areas in the far east and far west of the Sierra Gorda were dominated by the Spanish soon after the conquest of the Aztec Empire. What is now the Sierra Gorda in Guanajuato and Hidalgo states had Spanish cities in them by the middle of the 16th century. The main reason for this was that these areas had higher concentrations of mineral deposits. Another factor was that the indigenous peoples in these areas were relatively compliant to Spanish rule, especially in Hidalgo, where the Otomi had already been dominated by Xilotepec .(((The Spanish entered the heart of the Sierra Gorda early, with de Guzmn conquering the Oxitipa dominion, which encompassed Jalpan, Xilitla, Tancoyol and Tilaco in 1527.( However, during the early colonial period, the Quertaro Sierra Gorda would remain dangerous territory as the Chichimecas fought Spanish domination.((  with the first war between the Chichimeca Jonaz and the Spanish occurring in 1554.( During the 16th and 17th century, the Spanish would surround this area on west, east and south, with military and missionary incursions into the interior. Spanish settlements were begun to the south of it, such as the Villa de Cadereyta in order to form a bulwark against the nomadic Chichimeca tribes. In the late 16th century, a number of forts were established in the area including El Jofre and Jalpan.(  The incursions were provoked not because of significant mineral deposits in northern Quertaro, but rather, the area laid on roads which led into mining areas such as Guanajuato and Zacatecas .(Missionary work began in 1550 with an Augustinian mission in Xilitla, San Luis Potos. However, like military incursions, evangelism would occur from outside the heart of the region and gradually move inwards with many failures.( However, the challenge to the Spanish was not only the hostility of the native peoples, but also this area lacked cities or towns, or the social hierarchy that was taken advantage of in other areas of Mesoamerica. In this region, the Spanish would have to create population centers.(Systematic evangelization of the Quertaro area would not be attempted until the 17th century, when Augustinians in the east and Franciscans in the west began building missions in 1670 and 1680s, under the military protection of Captain de Labra. However, Labra died in 1683, and the missions were unprotected. The Dominicans would arrive soon after but by 1700, both they and the Augustinians and Dominicans abandoned missions in most of the area, leaving only the Franciscans in Tolimn, Cadereyta, Escanela and Macon.(() Many of the missions built in the interior during the 16th and 17th centuries were destroyed shortly after they were built.( Successful missions were established in the far south of the region, with the mission of San Francisco Tolimn in 1683,the mission of San Jos de Vizarrn in the 1740s.(( Because of this, much of the first evangelization efforts undertaken before the mid 18th century have been largely forgotten.(In 1740, the colonial government in City decided to extinguish indigenous resistance the Sierra Gorda, and send an expedition headed by de Escandn to accomplish this. Escandn mostly fought the Chichimeca Jonaz, culminating  in the of Media Luna in 1749, when the Chichimeca were decisively defeated.(( Legend states that at the end of the battle, the Chichimecas and Ximpeces climbed the hill the battle was fought on to commit collective suicide rather than to be integrated into the Spanish order.((In the far north of Quertaro, the Pames were more pacifistic and accepting of Spanish domination. It was these people who the Franciscans were able to group into larger settlements around missions.((  Although the mission in Jalpan  was established before Serras 1750 arrival into the region, Serra is given credit for building the five main missions of this area and completing the evangelization of the local people.(( In reality, the missions were built by Pame hands, under the direction of various Franciscan monks including Jos Antonio de Murgua in Conc, Juan Crispi in Tilaco, Juan Ramos de Lora in Tancoyol and Miguel de la Campa in Landa.(  However, the vision for the building of the missions was Serras, as he imagined a type of utopia based on Franciscan principles. Serra insisted that the missionaries learn the local languages and experience hunger along with the rest of the population. There was still hostility to the Spanish presence, and Serras response was economic as well as spiritual.( The portals of the five main mission churches reflect this vision as well. The style of the five missions is called Mestizo Baroque as the indigenous elements are more clearly visible here than in other Baroque structures further south. The Baroque is mostly confined to the portals of the main facades and are meant to function much as an altarpiece, and to teach a world view to the natives of the area.( Serra spent eleven years in the Sierra Gorda before moving on in the late 1760s.( The missions established in Quertaro would be the first of a long series of missions that would be established as the Spanish made their way north into what is now southern California.(Various uprisings occurred in the area in 1810 as part of the War of Independence. The town of Jalpan was burned and sacked by royalist forces in 1819.(In the 19th century, the area was still heavily dominated by indigenous people, with small settlements of mestizos and criollos. Conflicts between the indigenous groups and others began at this time over natural resources such as land, water and especially forests. The Gorda Rebellion began in 1847 by deserters from the Mexican army. The uprising spread to nearly all parts of the Sierra Gorda region from Guanajato to San Luis Potos to Veracruz, with the most activity in Santa Mara del Ro, Xich and Rioverde between 1847 and 1849. The rebels demanded free use of various lands, the abolition of levies, the division of haciendas and the termination of parish church rights to land. Initial efforts by authorities to subdue the uprising were only partially successful. Rebels had control of various cities such as Fernndez, Rioverde and Mara del Ro by 1849. However, the government caught the most important rebel leader by the name of Quiroz that same year and executed him. This broke the main resistance and the government was able to put much of the rebellion down by 1850.()From Jalpan, General Meja led military actions here against the Liberal government installed in the state of Quertaro and the country. He managed to take the main square of Quertaro in 1857. However, at the end of the War, he was executed along with I of Mexico .(In 1880, the first major (dirt) road was built through the area to connect it with the capital. This spurred economic development in the region.(Jalpan gained city status in 1904 as it already has electricity, telephone, telegraph and a sugar cane mill.(arqueomex) In 1911, the Grupo Revolucionario Aquiles Serdn was created in Jalpan under Policarpo Olvera and fought with the forces under I. Madero .(The modern Quertaro-Jalpan highway was built between 1962 and 1970, along with a number of other roads, bridges, electrification and water services.(The economy of the region had remained mostly the same since the colonial period, mostly based on agriculture and livestock.In 1989, this began to change as local residents formed the non governmental organization Grupo Ecolgico Sierra Gorda. The group works with environmental education, reforestation and waste management among other things. The group worked to get the biosphere declared in 1997 and has had international support since then. This has spurred ecotourism.( The mission churches of the area suffered damage from the War of Independence and the Revolution, and had been all but completely abandoned by the second half of the 20th century. In the 1980s, the churches were discovered by a group from INAH from Xilitla. The churches were restored in the 1980s and 1990s, and declared a World Heritage Site in 2003.(()()Cinnabar and mercury mining has been part of the southern Sierra Gorda since the Pre classic period. This mining remained important until the 1970s, when most of the commercial mines closing and the last, in Macon, closed in 2000. However, there are still at least six families known to mine the element on a very small scale. According to researchers, the long history of mercury mining here has caused the contamination of the environment as it built up over time. They believe this is behind the high levels of certain chronic diseases in the region.()There are plans to build a dam on the Extraz River, 85 meters tall to store 118 million m3 of water. The water would be transported by aqueduct 138 km to the city of Quertaro. However, there is local opposition to the project.()MissionsDuring the 16th and 17th century, there were attempts to evangelize the Sierra Gorda of Quertaro by the Augustinians, Franciscans and Dominicans. However, almost all of these missions were never completed or were destroyed soon after they were built by the indigenous communities.((  The military pacification of the area by de Escandn in the 1740s allowed for the building of permanent missions in the heart of the Sierra Gorda.( However, the five Franciscans missions accredited to Serra were built in Pame territory, as these people were more accepting of Spanish domination. The placement of the missions had the purpose of dividing the heart of the Sierra Gorda and to open roads into Luis Potos .(( The missions were built by Pame hands, under the direction of various Franciscan monks including Jos Antonio de Murgua in Conc, Juan Crispi in Tilaco, Juan Ramos de Lora in Tancoyol and Miguel de la Campa in Landa.(  However, the vision for the building of the missions was Serras, as he imagined a type of utopia based on Franciscan principles. Serra insisted that the missionaries learn the local languages and experience hunger along with the rest of the population. There was still hostility to the Spanish presence, and Serras response was economic as well as spiritual.( The main feature of these churches is the ornate decoration of the main portals, although there is decoration on the bell towers and in some churches, other areas as well. This decoration is termed Mestizo Baroque or mestizo architecture according to INAH.(( The ornate decoration is primarily aimed at teaching the new religion to the indigenous peoples, but unlike even the Baroque works further south, indigenous influence is obvious as the Serras idea was to demonstrate a blending of cultures rather than complete conquest.(( One element is the use of red, orange, and yellow, including pastel shades, and native sacred figures such as the rabbit and jaguar appear.( The mission churches have a single nave, covered by a cannon vault, but each has its own peculiarities, especially in the portals.(  Serra spent eleven years in the Sierra Gorda before moving on in the late 1760s north.(The mission in Jalpan was established before the arrival of Junpero Serra in 1744, but Serra was in charge of building the mission complex that stands today from 1751 to 1758. It is dedicated to the Apostle James, the first evangelist.(( This complex is situation in the center of the modern town in front of the main plaza and formed by an atrium, cloister, pilgrim portal and church, with a chapel annex on the left side. The original atrium wall was lost, but reconstructed in the same style, with three portals and inverted arches.( The main features of the ornate portal on the facade are Lady of the Pillar and the of Guadalupe, both with Mesoamerican connections, as well as a double headed eagle, meant to symbolize the blending of the two cultures.(A second mission is located in the community of Tancoyol called Nuestra Seora de la Luz de Tancoyol, dedicated to Our Lady of Light. This facade has profuse vegetative ornamentation, with ears of corn prominent and is the most elaborate of the five missions.(( It is likely that this mission was constructed by Juan Ramos de Lora, who resided here from 1761 to 1767.(( The structure is similar to those in Jalpan and Landa. It has a church with a Latin cross layout and choir area, a sacristy, atrium with cross and chapels in the corners of the atrium called capillas posas.  There is also a pilgrims gate, a cloister and quarters for the priest. The interior has a number of sculptures including one of Our Lady of Light.(The facade consists of three bodies, a pediment and four estpite columns. The lower body has sculptures of Saints Peter and Paul and who Franciscan coats of arms. The second body has sculptures of Joachem and Anne, with the Mary in her arms, and a niche in the center. There are also images from the Passion such as nails and a lance. This niche contained an image of Our Lady of Light, but it is empty now. Between the second and third bodies, there is a large window and above it, a representation of the stigmata of of Assisi. The pediment contains a large cross in relief of two styles related to the Franciscan and Dominican orders.(( The bell tower is narrow and the baptistery is at the base of this tower. On the lower part appears a small window which illuminates the baptistery. The cupola of the tower is in a pyramid shape with a Baroque iron cross on top.( Indigenous influence is noted in the interior columns of the church, which have images of a jaguar and a person with Olmec features.(San Miguel Conc is located forty km from Jalpan on Highway 69 to Ro Verde. The church is in the center of the community on one side of Guerrero Street. It is oriented to the south and dedicated to the Michael. It is the smallest of the mission churches and was probably finished in 1754, according to an inscription located inside the church.( Conc is a Pame word which means with me.( The decoration is mestizo as well with large flowers, foliage and coarse figures in indigenous style. It is distinguished by an image of the Trinity at the crest along with a rabbit and double-headed eagle.(( San Francisco del Valle de Tilaco is a small community eighteen km northeast of Landa de Matamoros.( It was constructed between 1754 and 1762 by Juan Crespi and dedicated to Francis of Assisi.( It has some characteristics different from the other missions. First, it is built on a gradient.( The bell tower is separated from the main nave of the church by the baptistery and structurally functions as a buttress for the church.( Tilaco is the best conserved of the five missions and has the most subtle ornamentation on its facade.( Its facades are composed of three horizontal and three vertical partitions, with the Franciscan coat of arms prominent over the main entrance.(  In Tilaco, the facade has small angels, ears of corn and a strange large jar over which is an image of Francis of Assisi.( One distinctive decorative element is four mermaids with indigenous features. Tilaco has the best conserved atrium corner chapels called capillas posas, which were used for processions.( Santa Mara del Agua de Landa is located twenty km from Jalpan on Highway 120 towards Xilitla. The mission was built between 1760 and 1768 by Miguel de la Campa is dedicated to Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception, which gives rise to part of the communitys name. It was the last of the missions to be built.(( The atrium is bordered by a wall and centered by a cross, and paved in stone. It is noted for its equilibrium in composition and very narrow bell tower, which is integrated into the facade. The sculpture of this facade is considered to be the best of the five according to Mexicana magazine.( The faces of the mermaids at Landa have indigenous features.(Junpero Serra spent eight years on the project of building the missions until 1770. When a number of historical events, including the expulsion of the Jesuits, forced the abandonment of the missions. Serra moved onto California.( When Serra left, the missions were left in the hands of regular clergy. During both the War of Independence and the Revolution, the missions suffered sacking and destruction.( Initial restoration work to the outside of the mission churches was begun in the1980s. Between 1991 and 1997, interior work on altars, choirs, organs and paintings was done. Further work was sponsored by the state between 1997 and 2002. Work done in the 1990s also included that on surrounding plazas and monuments.(( The effort to inscribe the missions as a World Heritage Site began in 2000 and was ultimately successful in 2003, when it was added during the 27th meeting of the World Heritage Committee.(Archeological sitesAt the end of the Pre Classic, most of the Sierra Gorda was populated by agricultural villages established by people who migrated here from the Plateau and of Mexico coast, mostly from the latter. Agriculture was concentrated in the lower valley areas, the few plains and some sides of mountains. This also included the cutting of forests to make more agricultural land. Most settlements are found near springs, ponds and small lakes as they were the most readily usable sources of water, instead of the rivers which ran deep inside narrow canyons. Settlements were ranked in importance according to their function, with Las Ranas and Toluquillo occupying the most important positions.(The height of settlement of the area came between the 6th and 10th centuries, with the largest number of successful human settlements, with an economy based on farming and mining. The pre Hispanic architecture of the area is best developed in the major urban centers. These cities are centered on a ball court which then opens up to various plazas and monumental structures on pyramid bases. Other structures such as administrative buildings and residences are found in both squared and round forms, but most often with a talud topped by a cornice. As many cities were situation on top of hills, the leveling of terraces to create space is another distinctive feature.( However, while stucco was used on some floors, there is no evidence of walls being covered in it, as seen further south.( The mining of cinnabar required coordinated and hierarchical labor practices for the various tasks involved, which would led to the development of the cities of Ranas and Toluquilla. This area was the primary provider of this red pigment to Mesoamerica.(The pottery of the area was influenced by the mineral deposits of the area for coloring and Olmec based influences coming from the east of the area. One strong example of both is the production of what is called black Olmec pottery.( There is little known about the religious beliefs of this area, as few symbols have been found to identify deities or religious calendar. Burials do indicate a belief in life after death, as interred individuals, sometimes sacrificed, are found in a fetal position. Grave goods include many objects used in life as well as containers which may have contained food.(Archeology in the Sierra Gorda began just before the second half of the 19th century, when mine engineers reported archeological finds in the mountains. Several of these engineers organized expeditions, some with state support, which resulted in to the mapping of sites such as Las Ranas and Toluquillo. These expeditions also include the first photographs of these sites. The discovery of these two cities generated academic interest, but they were not further explored until 1931, when archeologist Noguera and architect Cuevas went to evaluate the sites for the Direction of Pre Hispanic Monuments. By 1939, twenty seven sites had been identified in Quertaro, with twenty three in the Sierra Gorda.( There are over 400 archeological sites,( with twenty six primary ones, Ahuacatln, Arroyo Seco, Arquitos, Canoas, Cerro de la Campana, Cerro del Sapo, Conc, Decon, Ecatitln, El Doctor, La Colonia, La Plazuela, Lobo, Los Moctezumas, Pueblo Viejo, Pursima, Ranas, Sabino, San Juan, Soyatal, Tancama, Tancoyol, Tilaco, Toluquilla, Tonatico and Vigas.(From an anthropological perspective, Quertaro, especially the northeast, is of great interest because of the cultures which developed and disappeared here as well as its connections with Mesoamerica and cultures to the north, but knowledge of the region is limited.() It is possible that the peoples of the area had cultural and economic contact as far north as Casas Grandes, New Mexico and Arizona.( The mummy of a girl was found in a cave near the community of Altamira in the municipality of Cadereyta de Montes which shows evidence of agricultural settlement in an area today does not support it.()  The semi desert conditions the currently prevail in most of the Sierra Gorda was the result of climate change at the end of the first millennia CE, which dried the area and probably put an end to city and dominion development.(Las Ranas and Toluquilla were the two largest pre Hispanic cities to develop in the Sierra Gorda area. Las Ranas was the most developed city from the 7th to the 11th century, with Toluquilla somewhat smaller and reaching its height in the 11th century. Both cities are near to each other and both controlled the active trade routes of the area as well as the mining of cinnabar, highly prized as a red pigment in Mesoamerica. The trade that passed through the area linked the Gulf of Mexico to the central Mexican Plateau and some areas north as well.( Extensive mining was done at both Toluquilla and Las Ranas beginning between 200 and 300 CE, extracting cinnabar, mercury and sulfur. Cinnabar was the most prized used in funerals.() The structures at the sites indicate a stratified society and built with stone slabs and mud and covered in stucco in some places. At Toluquilla, many structures were built on terraces cut into the mountain to create more space. Las Ranas was taken over by the Jonaz late in its history but by the time the Spanish arrived, both cities were abandoned.( In 2009, INAH and other institutions carried out research at Toluquilla on thirty skeletons from the pre Hispanic era in order to determine the importance of mining in the south of the Sierra Gorda. The objective of the study was to determine the amount of accumulation of mercury in the bones to find out who was most involved in the mining and how it affected the health of the population. It also study patterns of mercury contamination in the surrounding environment as well. There have been over eighty extraction sites for cinnabar found around Las Ranas and Toluquilla, which lie on one of the largest deposits of the mineral in Mexico.(The Archeological-Mining of the Sierra Gorda Project was begun in the 1970s, based on an earlier interdisciplinary study carried out at the Sierra de Quertaro. The project was supported by the federal and state governments as well as UNAM. The project further mapped the cities of Las Ranas and Toluqillo. Further studies in the 1980s consolidated earlier findings and worked out settlement patterns in the wider area. Continued work at that time classified the ancient cultures and register more than 500 sites, encompassing all of northern Quertaro and into San Luis Potos.( The effect of mercury poisoning is not only an ancient problem but a modern one as well. These studies are also investigating the high levels of certain chronic diseases in the current population. The theory is that there is widespread mercury contamination in the environment because of it build up from mining for over hundreds of years.(ReferencesBibliography*External links*http://www.sierragorda.netPhotos galleries of the missions:*http://www.pbase.com/larpman/jalpan*http://www.pbase.com/larpman/landa*http://www.pbase.com/larpman/tancoyol*http://www.pbase.com/larpman/tilaco*http://www.pbase.com/larpman/concaGorda (Mxico)Gorda (Mxico)
4341563
Corbett_Denneny
image_caption  Denneny with the St. PatsCharles Corbett Corb Denneny (January 25, 1894  January 16, 1963) was a Canadian professional hockey forward who played professionally from 1912 to 1931, including nine seasons in the Hockey League for the Arenas, St. Pats, Hamilton Tigers and Chicago Black Hawks. Corbett also played for the Maroons of the PCHA and the Sheiks of WCHL. He twice won the Cup with Toronto (1918 and 1922).Personal lifeHe was born and raised in Cornwall, Ontario. As a child Denneny excelled in lacrosse, signing a pro contract at age 14. In track and field, Denneny tied the 100 yard world record in a meet in Toronto. In the winter, Denneny played hockey and he moved to Toronto to play both sports. After his playing career ended, Denneny returned to Toronto, coaching the Toronto Tecumsehs minor league team. He later joined the YMCA, becoming head masseuse and eventually director of health services.(Podnieks, p. 197) Denneny, who was often listed as Dennenay in newspaper reports eventually adopted the spelling.( Denneny is buried at Park Lawn Cemetery in Toronto.() His brother, Denneny also played hockey and is a member of the Hockey Hall of Fame.Playing careerCorbett Denneny first played professional hockey for the Cobalt McKinley Mines of the Cobalt Mining Hockey League, playing two seasons from 1912 to 1914. He then joined the Ontarios of the Hockey Association for their 191415 season. He then played one season and part of the 191617 season for the Blueshirts before being traded to the Ottawa Senators where he would play with his brother Cy. He returned to Toronto for the 191718 NHL season playing for the Torontos. He stayed with the organization as it changed to the Toronto Arenas and Toronto St. Patricks, and was a member of two Cup winners, in 1918 and 1922. After the 1922 Cup win he was traded to the Maroons of the Pacific Coast league and played in the 1923 Stanley Cup playoffs against the Ottawa Senators and his brother Cy, won by the Senators. In the 192324 season, he returned to Toronto and was traded to the Hamilton Tigers for whom he played for one season. After that season he was picked up by the Sheiks and played in the final two WHL seasons. After the WHL folded he played for the Sheiks in the Prairie Hockey League until he was traded to Toronto and played for the St. Patricks in the season they became the Maple Leafs. He was returned to the Sheiks when the trade was not completed and finished the season with the Sheiks. The following season, he was traded to the Chicago Black Hawks, and traded back to the Sheiks. It was his last games in the NHL. He would play three more seasons with the Minneapolis Millers, Newark Bulldogs and Chicago Shamrocks, retiring after the 193031 season.Career statisticsSee also* of players with 5 or more goals in an NHL gameReferences* External links* * DennenyDennenyDenneny
4348603
Legion_of_Super_Heroes_(TV_series)
 list_episodes  List of Legion of Super Heroes episodesLegion of Super Heroes is an American television series produced by Bros. Animation that debuted on September 23, 2006, based on characters appearing in the Comics book series. The series centers on the young Supermans adventures in the 31st century, fighting alongside a group of futuristic superheroes known as the of Super-Heroes. The show is produced by its main designer James Tucker (a co-producer of the League Unlimited series) for the WB line on The CW network.According to the official press release, the premise of the first season is that a group of teenagers from the 31st century travel back in time to recruit Superman in their fight against evil in their time. Unfortunately, they go too far back and land in a time when Clark Kent was younger and was about to move to Metropolis, already aware of his powers but undecided about his destiny. Taking him back to their future, the young Superman helps the Legion in fighting evil and upholding the laws of the Planets. It is described as a fast-paced, character-driven action comedy.The series draws on the rich history of the Legion of Super-Heroes, taking inspiration from stories set during all time periods of the comics nearly 50-year history. Continuity is internally consistent, but is not shared with any previous incarnation of the Legion, either animated or in print. Nor is it in the same continuity as the animated universe.The series was cancelled after its second season when Kids WB! was taken over by CW4Kids.()Development historyEarly reports had suggested the title of the series would be Superboy and the Legion of Super-Heroes, but the official announcement on April 24, 2006, confirmed the title as Legion of Super Heroes. The same announcement indicated that the series would air on the WB block of the new The CW network at 10 a.m. Eastern.( )Legal status/issuesAt the 2006 Con International, the production staff would not officially say whether current legal issues involving the ownership of Superboy had affected this series, or whether changes were made to tie in with the Returns movie, but one significant change had been made since the original announcements. The original press release() said that the Legion landed in the time of the young Superboy, while the revised press release description (June 2006) said that the Legion retrieved the young Superman, before he moved to Metropolis. At the conclusion of the pilot episode, Clark adopts the superhero name of Superman, and not Superboy.In Season Two, which takes place two years after the end of Season One, the character is called Superman, without reference to his young status.SupergirlIt was speculated that a backdoor pilot for a Supergirl and the Legion of Super-Heroes series was written and animated for the series in the form of the 2006 JLU episode Far From Home by Dini and McDuffie. However, the Legion series is unrelated to Far From Home or the 1998 episode of The Animated Series titled New Kids in Town (which did share continuity between series and episodes). James Tucker confirmed it to be untrue as the show was originally supposed to be Networks way of cashing in on Superman Returns. Cartoon Network later passed on having the series, hence its inclusion on Kids WB.() Beginning 2006, DC Comics did, however, have Supergirl join the Legion in its regular DC Universe title.Season TwoSeason Two mostly focuses on Brainiac 5 and his evil ancestor, Brainiac 1.0s relationship, and how Brainiac 5 had always been hiding all the information about his destiny and his ancestor all the years being a Legionnaire, but then eventually reveals all the information to Superman and the others in the same episode (Message in a Bottle; at the end of the episode, Brainy erases the episode from Supermans memory). Chameleon Boy appears more often in Season Two than Season One. In Season Two, most of the Legionnaires have changed their appearances, e.g., Lightning Lad has longer hair and gets a robotic arm. Their appearance changed based on the 2-years without Superman (after Superman left in the episode Sundown Pt.2, which is the finale of Season One). Triplicate Girl changes her codename into Duo Damsel because one of the bodies (the White Body) is lost in a temporal anomaly during one of their 41st Centurys battles, but eventually the White Body returned to the 31st Century, alive and unhurt, when the timeline was restored, and while Kell-El (or X) was reciting the Legionnaire Oath.According to a KidsWB press release,() the second season of Legion of Super Heroes finds the group fulfilling their collective destiny, each member elevating his/her skills to new levels... just in time to face even greater challenges. A incomprehensibly undefeatable nemesis  Imperiex, the destroyer of galaxies from the rich annals of DC Comics  puts the Legion into action alongside new team members. Superman returns from the 21st century with greater development of both his physical prowess and far better utilization of his powers to help the Legion toward victory in the 31st century and beyond. Moreover, the Legion finds a surprising, new ally from across the space-time continuum  a 41st century Superman, later called Kell-El, cloned using a combination of the original Supermans DNA and Kryptonite, making him as powerful as Superman while being invulnerable to green kryptonite; to assist in its efforts to rid the universe of this powerful foe. Along the way, the LSH  including new members like Chameleon Boy  provides the perfect complement of heroics and comedy to the efforts of the Supermen.Season Two takes place approximately two years after the Season One finale. The series logo was also slightly revised.() As with Season One, a total of 13 episodes were created for Season Two, which premiered on September 22, 2007. Warner Bros. has confirmed that the second season will also be the last for the show.(Third seasonA third season had been planned for production but was dropped because the Kids WB! slot was taken over by 4Kids. Season 3 was intended to take place three years after the end of Season 2 in which an older Superman would return. Sensor, Wildfire, Kid, Supergirl, Tellus, Projectra and Lass were to be introduced, while background characters Blok and Dawnstar would have active roles. Lads twin brother was intended to appear and Kell-El was intended to be a regular character but with a reduced role. The main focus of the third season would have been Brainiac 5s return, while trying to redeem himself after Season 2s finale. The final episode of season 2 linked the two seasons together.()(Airings outside of the USSeason One of the series began airing on Network UK on March 5, 2007. The thirteen episodes were shown weekdays through March 21, and the two-part season finale aired in the UK about five weeks before it was shown in the US. It also currently airs on CITVs Action Stations and re-airs on Network Too.In Canada, Season One began airing on YTV on September 8, 2007. It continued to air through the second season of the show uninterrupted, before being taken off the air.In Australia, Season One began airing on Network on August 9, 2009. The complete series was broadcast in widescreen.In Brazil, Season One began airing on Network Brazil on March 1, 2008.In Italy, Season One began airing on Network Italy on October 1, 2007.In the Philippines, Season One began airing on May 31, 2008 and the Season Two began airing on January 12, 2009 on Network Philippines.In Bulgaria the show began airing on Nova Television on November 30, 2008.In Israel, Season One began airing on Children Channel on September 18, 2008.In Netherlands, season one starts airing on 5 on march 2009.In Greece, the series aired in the summer of 2009 and 2010 on the Channel every weekday morning.In and Tobago, the series aired on TV6.CharactersIn Season One, the series revolved around a core group of eight Legionnaires but others appeared from time to time in recurring roles, similar in format to the Justice League Unlimited animated series.SupermanThe first season introduces a teenaged Clark Kent who is about to move from Smallville to Metropolis. He knows of his abilities but doesnt know what to do with his future (similar in nature to the Clark Kent featured in the Smallville television series). After travelling to the future, young Clark assumes the identity of Superman and gradually learns to control his abilities, becoming the hero he is destined to be. At the end of the first season, he returns to the present around the same time he left in the first episode.In Season Two, Superman returns to the future after spending two years in the past and gaining more experience with his powers and starting his superhero career in the present. A second Superman also appears in Season Two called X. This Superman (later given the name Kell-El) is from the 41st century and was created from Supermans DNA and Kryptonite (thus making him immune to the green rock) as a living weapon with different abilities (one of them is shooting green crystals from his hands). His main foe in the 41st century is Imperiex, who travels through time to the 31st century, forcing X to follow him into the past and recruit the Legion to help him.Core LegionnairesSeries producer James Tucker offered descriptions of the core team in a July 2006 interview at Con International in San Diego.( ) As with other DC team shows such as Justice League Unlimited, not every core character appears in all episodes. The following descriptions apply to the characters as seen in Season 1.* Lightning Lad is the eager and hot-headed unofficial leader of the team. Prone to fighting first and thinking later, he can come off as brash at first, but does seem mostly well intentioned. The lightning bolt scar on his right eye sometimes flashes brightly in times of battle. He is in love with Saturn Girl. In the episode Chained Lightning Imperiex destroys his right arm, and gained a new bionic one, model Cybernetic 4000. Founding member of the Legion. Has a twin sister, Ayla, and an older brother, Mekt.* Girl is a level-headed character with mental powers. She is composed at all times, but also very physical (she is depicted as more of a hand-to-hand combatant than her comic book predecessors). Tucker said that fellow animation creator Murakami thought of her character as someone who doesnt really understand personal boundaries; always touching people and knowing their deepest thoughts. Among her mental powers are abilities not traditionally associated with the character in the comics, such as telekinesis and the power to mentally create an explosive force field called a thought blast (which is so draining that she passes out afterwards) and the ability to go into a healing trance when unconscious (she can still mentally hear others in this state). In the Season Two premiere, she was put into a healing trance after a battle with Esper and awakens in episode 2.09. Founding member of the Legion.* 5 He is the series youngest (as of Season One) and smartest Legionnaire. He can transform his robot body in various ways. For the purposes of the show, his character has been altered by making him an outright robot (the comic book version is flesh-and-blood). His deep desire, though, is to be more human, like his teammates. Thus, in a way, hes somewhat like Pinocchio. This version of Brainiac 5 is closest to the reboot version in personality and includes the robotic aspects of the character Gear. James Tucker has always thought of him as kind of a Man Tate-type character; a kid who is so smart hes sent to college when hes only 12. Tucker has said he was inspired by Coipels rendition of him when designing him. A holographic representation of his deepest fear in episode 1.04 (Fear Factory) implies that his people the Coluans do not approve of his desire to emulate humanoids. He greatly desires Supermans friendship. Although there is much controversy over this subject, there is ample evidence to prove he has exceptional feelings for Shrinking Violet, although many fans also point out evidence of feelings for other characters, including Dream Girl, Superman, etc. In the season two finale, he turns into a human and leaves the Legion until he adjusts to his new human emotions. The cancelled third season was to focus mostly on his redeeming of his own evil actions which were ultimately controlled by Brainiac. Brainiac 1.0, who was destroyed by Brainiac 5, was resurrected as Brainiac 6 at the very end of episode 2.13.* Girl is, according to James Tucker, a princess who is kind of spoiled, but ultimately very devoted to being in the Legion. She has a somewhat sarcastic attitude to cover the fact that she really gets a kick out of finally being with other kids like herself. In addition to her traditional powers, she has displayed the ability to turn other people and objects temporarily intangible, though this seems to strain her. Phantom Girl has also been shown to disrupt electrical systems by passing through them. Her mother is the president of the United Planets. She is most often seen with Timber Wolf, for whom she seems to have some feelings.* Boy is a friendly young man who appears in either an overweight humanoid form or in a giant ball shape. He enjoys eating and is sometimes played up as the comedic character. James Tucker considers him the everyman member of the Legion; very down to earth and pragmatic. In a lot of ways he plays Bones to Brainiac 5s Spock. In episode 1.11 (Chain of Command) Bouncing Boy was elected leader of the Legionnaires, much to his own surprise - although in Season Two he no longer seems to be in command.* Girl (was also known as Duo Damsel) is one girl who was born with the power to transform into three nearly identical selves. She has demonstrated martial arts skills (which, when combined with her natural teamwork, makes her a worthy adversary). On the team, she often operates communications, and appears to have an attraction to Bouncing Boy (a nod to their pre-Crisis marriage). One of her duplicates was killed in the paradox created by Imperiex in the 41st century, and she became known as Duo Damsel. The emotional dismay her two other selves showed at her death suggests that each of her triplicates has a semi-separate awareness and identity. At the end of Season Two, the white duplicate returned from the future alive and well.* Timber Wolf, debuted in the self-titled second episode. Brin Londo, as a result of his fathers experiments on him, was transformed into a werewolf-like creature with enhanced speed, strength, agility, and senses. However, he also lost control over himself, becoming a fierce beast who acted on instinct and impulse. Only with Saturn Girls help was he able to re-establish some level of control, turning into a more humanoid form, though still possessing wolflike attributes. Soon afterward, he joined the Legion and took his codename in honor of past heroes. James Tucker described him as a loner but longs to be closer to people. His appearance makes him look a bit feral, but his personality is anything but. Hes the cool dude whos actually insecure inside. He seems to have feelings for Phantom Girl. In episode 1.13 (Sundown, Part 2), he admits to like baking.* Boy debuted in the Season Two opener of the series as one of the newest members of the Legion. He has the ability to shapeshift all or part of his body into something else, animate or inanimate, as well as utilize the strength and power of what he transforms into. His father funds the Legion, which allows them access to expensive material (such as battle cruisers). Chameleon Boy seems to be one of the few members of the team that has a fun-loving and sarcastic disposition, the reason of which being that the rest of the team has had to deal with so many issues the past couple of years, theyve become more solemn. He is good friends with Karate Kid, and in the episode in which the two met, Cam revealed that he is double-jointed.Other LegionnairesDuring the shows development, concept sketches of XS were seen online along with sketches of other Legionnaires by various artists. She appears in the final two episodes Dark Victory parts 1 and 2 as a background character. Dawnstar and Kid also appeared in these final two episodes along with many other rarely seen Legion members, however none of the new members shown in these episodes did anything to the plot of the story itself.In Season One, some Legionnaires were mentioned or shown as images before making an actual appearance. Fourteen members were shown during the season as already active (Blok, Boy, 5, Boy, Boy, Dream Girl, Lad, Lightning Lad, Girl, Girl, Shrinking Violet, Boy, Girl, and Tyroc), with five more being added during that time (Superman, Timber Wolf, Lad, Boy, and Lad).The Season One opening credits sequences included a glimpse of the Mission Monitor Board signs for many Legionnaires as well as shots of flying Legionnaires who would be seen in later episodes (though not all of those with Mission Monitor Board symbols appeared). At least four members of the Legion as seen in the comics appeared in some way on the show but had not joined by the end of the first season (Boy, Lass, Wildfire, and Boy).In Season Two, Karate Kid appeared in the opening credits with the other Legionnaires, though he did not appear until the fifth episode (in which Kid also became a new member). Similar to Karate Kid, Sun Boy appeared in the Season Two opening titles and made semi-regular appearances, but did not have a speaking line or have someone else refer to him by name. Ayla Ranzz, sister of Lightning Lad, finally made an appearance, but as currently a child without apparent super powers and not as the Lass of the comic books.CastLegionnairesShadow Lass and Sensor were mentioned to appear in the third season, but were not actually in any of the two prior seasons.Other charactersList of episodesThis list is ordered by production number, which in some cases is different from the air date order. Production number 1.04 (Fear Factory) and 1.06 (Phantoms) were aired out of order, as were episodes 1.07 (Childs Play), 1.09 (Brain Drain), and 1.10 (The Substitutes).Awards and nominations20062007 SeasonThe series was nominated for three Arts Emmy Awards, a subset of the Emmy Awards.() None of the nominations won their category.* Outstanding Achievement in Music Direction and Composition* Outstanding Achievement in Sound Editing - Live Action and Animation* Outstanding Achievement in Sound Mixing - Live Action and AnimationDC Comics cameos and homagesThe series has numerous cameos and characters that are evocative of and pay homage to other DC Comics characters.* Episode 1.01: A janitor is briefly seen at the Superman Museum wearing a costume that resembles that of Gold, and is preceded by the appearance of a robot that looks just like Boosters sidekick, Skeets. This is a reference to his job in the Metropolis Space Museum previous to becoming a hero in the 20th century. In addition, the inhabitants of New Metropolis resemble some of the alien species that make up the Lantern Corps, including the natives of Xudar and Barrio III.* Episode 1.02: An alien creature Superman and the Legion are fighting in space is noticeably similar to a Kryptonian creature that attacked Jor-El, Supermans father, in the pilot episode of Superman: The Animated Series, The Last Son of Krypton.* Episode 1.03: In this episode, Alexis steals a bike belonging to a New Metropolis citizen who resembles Lobo. In addition, a satellite/space station resembling the League Watchtower is seen and struck during a ball game. Alexiss story and character also seem a Legion-era analogue of Luthor and most likely his descendant, respectively. In fact, her prison uniform clearly has her last name written on it in Interlac: Luthor. Also Lex can be a diminutive for either Alexander or Alexis.* Episode 1.05: In the center of the main arena, theres a banner which reads, in Interlac: Batman Lives.* Episode 1.06: Prisoners in the Zone resemble Supermans foes, Doomsday and the Pre-Crisis versions of Zod and Faora. Whats more, Draxs characterization is reminiscent of Zod himself, and numerous elements of his costume such as the big Z on his logo and origin hint that his origin is somehow connected to Zod. His two pets also heavily resemble an alien monster adopted by Bizarro in the The Animated Series episode, Little Big Head Man. The Phantom Zone projector is also identical to the one used in Superman: The Animated Series and Justice league Unlimited.* Episode 1.07: Zyx is patterned after Superman villain Mxyzptlk, in both powers and demeanor (playful at first, but soon becomes malevolent). In addition, Zyxs first costume is based on Mxyzptlks Silver Age costume. Zyxs helmet also resembles the League of America villain Brain Storm. In another scene, when Zyx is creating various objects, he briefly conjures the Eye, a Lantern power battery, and Fates helmet.* Episodes 1.08 and 1.10: Prospective applicants for the Legion who did not eventually form the series version of the of Substitute Heroes in episode 1.10 included not only some who did join the comics version (Antennae Lad, Double Header, Boy, Lad, and Girl), but also other rejects (such as Quake Kid, Polecat and The Mess), and even a Legionnaire (Kid).* Episode 1.09: The Mining robots which Superman and Timber Wolf battled toward the end have a very similar design to the space exploration robots built by the Waynetech/Luthorcorp partnership in the episode of The Animated Series episode Worlds Finest. Brainiac 5 also rattles off the names of the colors after saying green rocks kill the last son he then lists them as coming in Blue, Red and Gold, all of which were variations of Kryptonite. In addition, Brainy inadvertently reveals that Superman is affected by the red sun while they are on Zuum, though it is ignored, as he said Superman shouldnt play with red ants.* Episode 1.10: One of the colorizations Kid gives Superman matches the animated universe animated version of Bizarro. Other colors include red (resembling pre-Crisis Red), blue (resembling pre-Crisis Blue), and green (giving a sense of Kryptonite poisoning). The beginning of the episode shows a plant monster that attacks the Legionnaires, similar to one that appears with Poison Ivy in The Animated Series.* Episode 1.12: Brainiac 5 mentions a Great Crisis, a reference to on Infinite Earths and/or Crisis. The Sun-Eater also appears in this episode, this is the third time the Sun-Eater has been included in a Legion story line.* Episode 1.13: Ferro Lads sacrifice echoes his comic book counterparts own fate against the Sun-Eater.* Episode 2.02: The now adult and seasoned Superman tells his clone that he reminds him of a friend of his that was a grim loner that ended up becoming a valuable member of a team. Such a description fits Supermans League teammate, Batman. He also mentions Wally (the third Flash).* Episode 2.08: A Superman android appears in the of Solitude, visually resembling the Superman villain Superman. A dog and cat resembling super-pets Krypto and Streaky are also seen in Kandor. Brainiacs skull ship also appears in this episode.* Episode 2.12: Some characteristics of Brainiac 5s evil form were previously linked to 13 (such as having tentacles coming out of his back). Brainiac 5 also remakes Imperiexs ship into his own version of the Brainiac skull ship. Many Legionnaires from across the various version of the comic book Legion are also seen as background characters in this episode, but play no role beyond this.* Episode 2.13: The scene where Brainiac 5 holds Superman is the same as the introduction scene for this season of Superman holding Brainiac 5. Also, the scene inside Brainiac 5s head where several other Brainiac 5s appeared also mimics a scene in Reboot Legion where several Brainiac 5s tackle a telepath who invaded Brainiac 5s mind. In the show, the clones tell Brainiac 1.0 to get out of his head; in the books they told the telepath her choices were to leave the information she found in his head behind or not leave at all.Home media releaseSeason One was released on home video in three separate volumes, each with 4 episodes (the third having 5). Episodes are also available for online viewing. As of August, 2011, Season Two has not yet been released for home video.Legion of Super Heroes in the 31st CenturyA book based on the shows continuity was published under the title Legion of Super-Heroes in the 31st Century. According to the comics writer, Torres, the name was chosen to distinguish itself from more specifically youth-oriented titles such as League Adventures and Adventures.() The first issue was distributed during Comic Book Day of 2007 in addition to being sold.An interview concerning the of Super Heroes in the 31st Century comic confirmed that the comic was to continue publication despite the series ending, and that the comic would also be telling stories that were to have taken place after the Season 2 finale.( ) As of issue #20, the comic ceased publication.()Additional charactersWhile the comic incorporates the cast of show, other characters from DC Comics have made an appearance.* Fall Off Boy  Legion of Super Heroes in the 31st Century #16* Gold  Legion of Super Heroes in the 31st Century #19* Circe  Legion of Super Heroes in the 31st Century #7* Bart Allen/Impulse  Legion of Super Heroes in the 31st Century #15* Luthor  Legion of Super Heroes in the 31st Century #13* Lane  Legion of Super Heroes in the 31st Century #13* White  Legion of Super Heroes in the 31st Century #13Collected editionsIssues #1-7 were collected in the trade paperback Legion of Super Heroes in the 31st Century, Vol. 1: Tomorrows Heroes (March 2008, ISBN 978-1401216689).In other mediaA tie-in promotion with McDonalds Meal took place in August 2007. The Legion show was represented by eight figures (Superman, Timber Wolf, Lightning Lad, Mano, Tharok, Brainiac 5, Bouncing Boy, and Validus). As Happy Meal toys often have a girl toy and boy toy, this set was aimed at the boys.Action figures by Mattel were not produced, due to lack of retailer interest. Mattel holds the master license for toys based on any DC series in any medium.()The miniatures game HeroClix produced a special starter set of the Legion including a figure of Young Superman during the first season.ReferencesExternal links* * *   ()Lgende des super-hroslexin dos superheroesof Super Heroes (serie animata)of Super Heroes (animatieserie)of Super Heroeszh:
4356566
Patrick_(parish)
{| border1 cellspacing0 alignright cellpadding2 width260px|- aligncenter bgcolorpink ! Parish of Patrick|- aligncenter |250px|- aligncenter bgcolorpink!Details|- alignleft||- aligncenter bgcolorpink!Main Peaks|- alignleft| |- aligncenter bgcolorpink!Main Glens|- alignleft||- aligncenter bgcolorpink!Treens|- alignleft||-|}Patrick is a parish in the sheading of Glenfaba, on the west coast of the of Man. GeographyThe parish is a mountainous region including the northern slopes of the South Barrule; Slieauwhallin; and to the west, Dalby Mountain. Glen Rushen is located between Dalby Mountain and the South Barrule, and leads downwards to Glen Mooar and finally Glen Maye. Through these glens flows the Glenmaye river, with the Glenmaye waterfall, about one mile from the coast. There are disused slate quarries in Glen Rushen. In common with other hilly areas of the island, there are several forest plantations. The population is historically partly agricultural, fishing, and mining, and is sparsely distributed over the parish.  There are four small villages, Dalby near the coast on the west side of Dalby Mountain, Foxdale, a former mining village, Patrick in the north, and Maye, on the coast and home to the glen of the same name.()DemographicsThe Isle of Man census 2006 listed the population as 1,294.()References(le de Man)Pherick
4361213
Kelly_Downard
Patrick Kelly Downard is the Republican Councilman for the 16th District of Louisville Metro in Kentucky in the States of America and served as Metro Council President from 2004 to 2005. Downard previously held the title of President of Louisville Community Development Bank, which he was appointed to by Mayor E. Abramson. Before being appointed by Abramson, Downard (who is a Public Accountant) held the titles of President of the PNC Mortgage Company and Senior Vice President of PNC Private Banking. In 2005, Downard filed to be a candidate in the 2006 Louisville Metro Mayor election.He was raised in Hills, Kentucky, a suburb of Louisville, and has moved back to the area as an adult. His grandfather, C. Paul Downard, worked for a retail coal company, and served as president of the former Board of Aldermen. Downards father, Norman, was president of a coal mining and mining equipment company, P&D Coal Mining Co. Inc.Downard graduated from St. Xavier High School in 1964, also graduated from the of Dayton School of Business Administration and earned a of Business Administration from University. A Catholic, Downard and his wife Denise have two children.Downards 2006 Mayoral campaign was an underdog one, Abramson was a long-time mayor of the city and had wide name recognition, and most polls showed his approval rating at around 80%. Downard ran his campaign based on promises to improve the local economy and increase funding for public safety, saying that under Ambramson the city had slipped in both areas and was lagging behind nearby cities like Cincinnati and Indianapolis.()Downward was defeated in the election, receiving 76,423 votes (31%) to Abramsons 164,414 (67%). Although Downward was endorsed by police officers and firefighters, the Courier-Journal reported that his message that Abramson was soft on crime and economic issues failed to reach voters, saturated by other ads of, among other things, five congressional races in the Louisville television market. Nevertheless, Downward was arguably the most serious challenger Abramson had yet faced in the mayoral race.() References  External links * Kelly Downard for Mayor* Council Website
4369275
Pittsburg,_Colorado
Pittsburg is a former mining town from the late 19th century located about 9 miles north of Butte, Colorado. While Pittsburg is sometimes considered a town, none of the original structures still exist. The only cabins that still exist in the area were built after 1973 and are strictly summer vacation homes, as the area is inaccessible by cars during the winter. Pittsburg was named in honor of the industrial heritage of Pennsylvania. A nearby mountain summit is named Schuylkill Mountain in honor of the River in Pennsylvania.Pittsburg originally served several mining operations in the late 19th century, including the nearby Mine and the much larger and more well known Mine.External links* Description of Pittsburg, CO history
4378381
Mining_Association_of_the_United_Kingdom
The Mining Association of the United Kingdom is a association for all kinds of mining undertaken by UK companies.FunctionIt promotes and fosters the interests of the metals and mining industry in any part of the world and the corporations, companies, firms and persons engaged or interested in the industry or in industries ancillary to or allied with the metals and minerals industry.Its members include all the major industrial mineral mining operators in the Kingdom. Its work is concentrated on representing its members interest at Government and European level on environmental and health & safety issues. It is actively involved in lobbying and consulting on proposed legislation.It is an active member of Euromines (the European Mining Federation) and values the access and links to Commission legislative procedures, which this brings. The majority of new legislation which has impact on the mining sector originates in Brussels. Therefore the Association is committed to participating in Europe.It represents the commercial interest of the UKs mining industry outside of coal mining, and includes industries mining:* Potash (carbonate)* Salt* Sylvinite - a mixture of sylvite (chloride) and halite (commonly known as rock salt - chloride)* Gypsum (calcium sulphate) - used for plaster* Fluorspar - also known as fluorite (fluoride)* Barytes (barium sulphate)HistoryFormationIt was founded in August 1946 under the name of British Overseas Mining Association. The founding members were:* New Consolidated Gold Fields Ltd* Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Co Ltd* Mining Trust Ltd* Rio Tinto Co Ltd* Union Corporation Ltd* General Mining and Finance Corporation Ltd* Mason and Berry LtdThe issues which the Association dealt with on behalf of this original group were mainly taxation issues. Name changeIn 1966 this name was changed to Overseas Mining Association and in 1976 the name was changed to its present style when it merged with the United Kingdom Metal Mining Association.StructureIt is based in Lichfield in Staffordshire.Current members*:Mining plc*:American plc*:Potash Limited*:British Gypsum Limited*:Mines Limited*:Europe Limited*:of Materials, Minerals and Mining*:Salt Mining and Exploration Co. Limited*:Tinto plc*:Union Limited*:United Kingdom Nirex Limited*:Armstrong*:IMC Group*:School of Mines, of Exeter*:Coal Mining Museum for EnglandExternal links* The Mining Association of the United Kingdom website* Euromines
4387915
Roy_Clarke_(footballer)
Northwich VictoriaRoyston James Clarke (1 June 1925 &ndash; 13 March 2006) was a Welsh footballer who played for Cardiff City, Manchester City, Stockport County and Wales as a winger.An outstanding schoolboy sportsman, Clarke became a miner during the Second World War, playing amateur football in his spare time. He signed amateur forms with Cardiff City in 1942, becoming a professional when league football resumed after the war. Part of the Cardiff side which won promotion from Division Three (South) in 194647, he signed for Second Division Manchester City in May 1947, Cardiff receiving 12,000 for the player.  Manchester City had just secured promotion with matches to spare, resulting in Clarke achieving an unusual feat of playing in three different divisions in consecutive matches.Clarke was a Manchester City regular for the next decade, making 349 league appearances. He was part of the Manchester City team which reached consecutive Cup finals in the 1950s, winning in 1956. In 1958 Clarke moved to Stockport County, and later had a spell as manager of Northwich Victoria. After retiring from football he ran a sports shop, and subsequently returned to Manchester City, where he ran the social club for nearly 25 years. He died in 2006, after a long illness with disease.CareerRoy Clarke was born in Monmouthshire, to a mining family. At school he excelled at sports, representing Wales in a schoolboy baseball international,() and winning a local tennis championship.() Upon leaving school Clarke followed his fathers career path and became a miner, as one of the boys.() In his free time he played for a local amateur football team, Albion Rovers. Here he was spotted by Cardiff City, who signed him as an amateur in December 1942.() In 1945 he received his first taste of playing against top-class opposition, a touring Dynamo Moscow.() His team suffered a heavy defeat; the match finished 101 to the Soviets. The following year he represented the Welsh national team for the first time, playing in a Victory international against Ireland.(Clarke played as an outside-left for Cardiff City in 39 league matches, scoring 11 goals (1942&ndash;1947). When league football resumed after the war, Clarke was an integral part of the Cardiff City team which gained promotion from the Third Division in 194647. In May 1947 he transferred to newly crowned Second Division champions Manchester City, the fee 12,000.() He made his debut in Manchester Citys final match of the season, against Newport County, his home town club. Clarke made his next appearance in the First Division against Wolverhampton Wanderers on the opening day of the 194748 season, scoring his first goal for the club in the process. This meant he had completed the unusual feat of playing three different divisions of the League in three consecutive matches.() In the 1954&ndash;55 season Manchester City had success using a tactical system known as the Plan, in which Revie was used as a deep-lying centre-forward. Clarke was one of the players to benefit from this system, with interplay between Clarke and Revie prominent. A long run in the FA Cup followed. Clarke scored the winning goal in a semi-final against Sunderland, heading in a Joe Hayes cross to send City to Wembley, but suffered a knee injury late in the match.(Ward, The Manchester City Story, p46) After missing five matches Clarke returned to the starting line-up, but he aggravated the injury in the final league match of the season. The knee required an operation, causing him to miss the FA Cup Final.()Manchester City reached the FA cup final again the following season, Clarke played all but one match of the cup run, and supplied a cross for the winning goal in both the quarter-final (against Everton), and the semi-final (against Tottenham Hotspur).( Manchester City played Birmingham City in the final, and were viewed as underdogs, despite reaching the final the previous year.(James, Manchester City &mdash; The Complete Record, p 125) Early in the match Clarke exchanged passes with Revie, who set up Joe Hayes for Manchester City to take the lead with less than three minutes played.(James, Manchester City &mdash; The Complete Record, p 122) Birmingham equalised in the first half, but two second half goals meant Manchester City beat Birmingham City 31. The final is most well-known for being the match where goalkeeper Trautmann continued play after breaking his neck.By the 195758 season injuries had taken their toll upon Clarke and first team appearances were sparse, though he became one of the first players to gain from a new benefit; upon completing ten years service for the club he was given a cheque for 1,000.( After a pre-season game against Dortmund, which Clarke had played despite carrying a knee injury, manager McDowall informed him that he would soon be made available for transfer,(Rowlands, Trautmann: The Biography, p197) but an injury to Dyson meant Clarke was retained for one more season.(Rowlands, Trautmann: The Biography, p201) He made seven appearances in his final season at the club, the last in a 51 FA Cup defeat to West Bromwich Albion, in which he played centre-forward instead of his customary position on the wing.() In total he played 349 league matches for Manchester City, scoring 73 goals. He had a brief spell as assistant coach in the latter part of his Maine Road career, but stepped down from the position to allow his former teammate Meadows to take the position instead.(James, The Official Manchester City Hall of Fame, p150) In September 1958 he moved to Stockport County for 1,500,( where he played  25 league matches, scoring 5 goals. He also won 22 full international caps for Wales.() Non-playing career He later managed Northwich Victoria for a brief period, before returning to Manchester, where he opened a sports shop in Fallowfield. Through his friendship with Trautmann he gained a contract to become the first Adidas merchant in the area,(Rowlands, Trautmann: The Biography, p190) but the shop closed a few years later as Clarke wished to concentrate upon activities at Manchester City. Clarke became the manager of the Manchester City social club in 1966; he and his wife Kathleen ran the social club together for nearly 25 years.( The social club was open seven days a week, providing an opportunity for players, management and supporters to form closer bonds.() It received praise in Hopcrafts 1968 book The Football Man, for providing a counterpoint to football clubs who largely ignored fans except when they were inside the ground.( During his time at the social club Clarke was a founder of two other Manchester City organisations: the Development Association, which acts as a fund for ground improvements and youth development, and the Former Players Association, which was co-founded with Fagan and Little,( Clarke serving as secretary.()  In 2004 he was inducted into the Manchester City Hall of Fame, receiving a lifetime achievement award. Towards the end of his life he suffered from disease, and died on 13 March 2006, leaving a wife and three daughters.()HonoursAs a playerCity F.C.* FA Cup winner 1956 References Clarke
4390811
Newcraighall
Newcraighall is a suburb of Edinburgh, located in the southeast of the Scottish capital. A former mining village, its prosperity was based on the Midlothian coalfields and in particular the now closed Monktonhall pit.  The village had a miners club (demolished after a fire on 15th July 2009) and bowling green. Newcraighall now plays host to an out of town shopping complex known as The Fort or Kinnaird Park.railway station is the terminus for the short Crossrail service from Edinburgh Waverley via Brunstane. This line uses the northern stub of the former Route from Carlisle to Edinburgh and although mostly lifted, the Parliament approved a Bill in June 2006 to reopen the railway from Newcraighall to just south of Galashiels in the Scottish Borders. The line could see its first passenger journeys in 2011, 42 years after closure (Closed 5 January 1969) following the Beeching report in 1963.Newcraighall was the setting for the film My childhood by Douglas, There is a plaque to Bill Douglas in the village. The village also contains the bridge that is the famous scene from the film. The village also contains a sculpture by Harvey which celebrates the mining tradition of the area. On Newcraighall Road is The Craigmillar Arts Centre, with a  Woman of Achievement plaque for Crummy. She has lived in Newcraighall for many years.External links*Fort Kinnaird, Newcraighall, Edinburgh*Google map showing local paths
4400121
Brataccas
thumb|300px|right|Screenshot from Brataccas. Kyne, with the red helmet, moves from room to room on the base via the doors, one of which is visible in the upper left. The caption on the left shows the door leads to the Calypso Lift. The computer character is making a threat the game found difficult to actually carry out.Brataccas is a game released in 1986 for the Amiga, ST, and Macintosh,(Brataccas info at Psygnosis.org) and was the first game published by Psygnosis. It is a fiction game, with game elements. Brataccas is believed to be the remains of the much hyped vaporware project Bandersnatch, which was partially developed by Software.StoryThe player controls Kyne, a genetic engineer who developed technology for creating supermen. The oppressive government of the day desired this research to create a breed of supersoldier, which Kyne refused to assist. In retaliation, the government frames him, claiming that Kyne was seeking to sell his work to the underworld. At the same time, the government secretly offered a reward to anyone in the underworld who turned Kyne over to them. With both the forces of law and lawlessness aligned against him, Kyne is forced to flee Earth.(The Story so Far - Brataccas manuals short backstory)During his escape, Kyne learns that evidence needed to clear his name can be found on the distant asteroid of Brataccas. Brataccas, first of the asteroids to be colonized, is a backwater mining colony with a wild west feel of lawlessness and corruption. Kyne has to find the evidence in order to win the game, obtaining it from the in-game characters. The manual gave no indication of who held the evidence, suggesting that everyone was equally corrupt and dangerous to talk to.GameplayBrataccas displays the game world as a series of rooms that would appear on-screen as the character moved through the habitat, each one displayed from a side view (a pre-side-scroller). Most movement was horizontal, with automatic elevators to permit access to different floors. Occasionally, labeled doors in the rear wall or teleportation booths with the appearance of cylindrical shower stalls led the player to different sets of rooms. The term rooms is slightly inaccurate, as there were also a small number of outdoor areas displayed using the same system. In order to preserve detail on the character animations, the characters had to be fairly large, making the rooms small in relative terms. They could get quite crowded with even a few characters in them.The player had a limited amount of interaction with the game world, generally limited to movement, picking up or dropping objects, or talking to non-player characters (NPCs). These NPCs operated under computer control and pursued their own objectives, sometimes even engaging in combat with other NPCs. All the games characters utilized swords in combat to maintain extended battle in the small rooms, justified in-game as a measure to avoid potential loss of atmosphere to space from stray ranged weapons fire.Interaction between characters was carried out through dialog bubbles similar to those in comic strips. The player could only respond to other statements, at which point a menu of possible responses appeared. The selections were fairly limited, and the outcomes often seemingly random. Additionally, a number of loudspeakers located in some rooms would announce events like fights breaking out. No attempt was made to declutter the balloons, so if more than two characters were talking the screen would often fill with them, rendering most of them unreadable.The control system was an early example of a interface, or as many reviews pointed out, a poor attempt at one. To move, the mouse was moved in the direction the player wanted to walk, or faster if they wanted to run. However, the inaccuracy of the system combined with lag times in the interpretation of the movements often rendered the game almost uncontrollable. One reviewer wrote, Controlling Kyne reliably ... in a critical situation is nearly impossible.(Brataccas review by Michael Fleischmann, Antic Vol. 5 No. 2, June 1986. URL accessed 2006-04-17.)Interaction with objects was limited to picking them up or dropping them, at which point other characters might interact with them as well. For instance, one could buy information by dropping money, bags of which were scattered around the game world. One annoying gameplay problem was that if Kyne fell from one level to another, he would drop whatever he was holding. If another character was there, they would pick it up.Critical receptionThe game received mixed reviews. Audiences generally liked its sophisticated setting and story and ambitious graphics; on the Amiga and Atari ST, the game ran in 4-color, 640  200 resolution, a high resolution mode rarely used for games at the time. On the Atari ST, it was one of the very rare games to support the monochrome 640  400 high resolution which required a special monochrome monitor (model SM 124 or SM 144), and it is likely to be the only game ever which allowed to change the type of monitor during gameplay. (Disconnecting the monitor or TV-Set usually resulted in a machine reboot in order to protect the video equipment.)However, it was criticized for the extremely difficult game controls.( Despite this criticism, the game is fondly remembered today by some fans, and enjoys a cult status.Cover artThe box cover art for Brataccas was made by fantasy artist Roger Dean, who would provide artwork for many Psygnosis titles. It was later used as the album cover for Uriah Heeps 2001 album The Official Anthology.ReferencesExternal links**brataccas.com fan site, with full text of original game manual*youtube short video depicting scenes of the game*Brataccas.NET another fan site, about technical aspects*Compute! magazine 1986 review of Brataccasit:Brataccas
4405037
Piranhas,_Gois
thumb|right|245px|PiranhasPiranhas is a small town and municipality in western Gois state, Brazil.  It is a large producer of milk and has a large herd of cattle.  LocationPiranhas is located on the Piranhas River and is served by highways:  BR-158, which connects Jata to Aragaras; and GO-060, which connects Piranhas to Ipor. The distance to the state capital, Goinia, is 321 km.  Highway connections are made by GO-060 / Trindade / Nazrio / Lus de Montes Belos / Israelndia / Ipor / Arenpolis.  Municipal boundaries are with:*north and west:  Jardim de Gois*east: Arenpolis*south:  de Gois and DoverlndiaDemographic InformationThe population density was 5.44 inhab/km in 2007.  There were 8,872 urban dwellers and 2,267 rural dwellers.  The population has declined by about 4,000 people since 1980.  Economic InformationThe economy is based on mining, agriculture, cattle raising, services, public administration, and small transformation industries.  In 2007 there were 19 small transformation industries and 128 commercial units.  There were three banks: Banco do Brasil S.A. - BRADESCO S.A. - Banco Ita S.A. There were two dairies: Maroca Indstria de Laticnios. - Lactosul Ind. de Laticnios Ltda (May 2006)The main crops in 2006 were pineapple, rice, bananas, beans, manioc, soybeans, and corn.  The cattle herd was large with 192,000 head in 2006. Agricultural data 2006*Number of farms:  790*Total area:  207,550 ha.*Area of permanent crops: 162 ha. (bananas and pineapple)*Area of perennial crops: 1,421 ha. (soybeans, corn, rice)*Area of natural pasture:  152,180 ha. *Area of woodland and forests:  45,753 ha.*Cattle herd: 192,000*Number of workers: 1,800*Number of farms with tractors: 142*Number of tractors:  179    IBGEEducation and HealthIn 2006 there were 12 schools, 103 classrooms, 194 teachers, and 3,602 students.  In 2007 there were 3 hospitals with 87 beds. *Higher education: Campus of the State University of Gois*Adult literacy rate: 84.8% (2000) (national average was 86.4%)*Infant mortality rate: 28.24 (2000) (national average was 33.0). TourismThere is potential for eco-tourism with conditions for hiking, going down rapids, and other sports activities practiced near nature.  The So Domingos river is ideal for canoeing, and descending on rafts or tire-tubes. Hikers can walk through virgin forests, which have unexplored caves. *Municipal Development Index:  0.773*Ranking in state:  118/245*National ranking:  2249/5507 HistorySettlement began in 1948 when engineers and workers building the road between Caiapnia and Aragaras arrived in the region and set up camp on the banks of the Piranhas River.  A settlement was created with the name of Piranhas, after the river.  In 1952 it became a district of Caiapnia, receiving its municipal autonomy in 1953.    See also*of municipalities in Gois*of GoisSources of Data*IBGE*Seplan*Frigoletto*City BrazilFor the complete list see Frigoletto.com.br(Gois)(Gois)(Gois)(Gois)(Gois)(Gois)()(Gois)Gois
4410572
Yaksha_Kingdom
File:MathuraYaksa.jpg|thumb|170px|right|MathuraYaksha, 1st-2nd century CEYaksha Kingdom refers to the territory of a tribe called Yakshas who were one of the Tribes of Ancient India. They had kinship with another similar tribe, the Rakshasas. Yaksha king Vaisravana (also known as Kubera, Kuvera etc.)  and Rakshasa king Ravana were both sons of the sage Visrava Paulastya. Kubera is sometimes mentioned as a Rakshasa king. Kubera ruled a Yaksha kingdom of enormous wealth. Pandavas visited this place during their forest life with the help of Rakshasa Ghatotkacha and his friends.References in MahabharataYaksha TerritoryThe territory of Yakshas under Kubera is mentioned as the region surrounding the Kailasa mountains and Manasa lake (Tibet) in the Himalayas.Pandavas ExpeditionsExpeditions of Pandavas (3:139) guided by sage Lomasa:-Lomasa said, now hast thou left behind the mountains Usiravija, Mainaka and Sweta, as well as the Kala hills, O son of Kunti, O bull among the descendants of Bharata, here flow before thee the seven Gangas. This spot is pure and holy. Here Agni blazeth forth without intermission. Now wilt thou see the play-ground of the Devas, marked with their footprints, as we have passed the mountain Kala. We shall now ascend that white rockthe mountain Mandara, inhabited by the Yakshas, Manibhadra and Kuvera, king of the Yakshas. O king, at this place eighty thousand fleet Gandharvas, and four times as many Kimpurushas and Yakshas of various shapes and forms, holding various weapons, attend upon Manibhadra, king of the Yakshas. In these regions their power is very great. And in speed they are even as the wind. They can, without doubt, displace even the lord of the Devas from his seat. Protected by them, and also watched over by the Rakshasas, these mountains have been rendered inaccessible. Here are fierce ministers of Kuvera and his Rakshasa kindred.Section 3:152 describes Pandava Bhimas expedition to this territory:-Bhima saw in the vicinity of the Kailasa cliff, that beautiful lotus lake surrounded by lovely woods, and guarded by the Rakshasas. And it sprang from the cascades contiguous to the abode of Kuvera. And situated on the rocky elevation this expanse of excellent water was exceedingly fair. That unearthly receptacle of waters was covered with celestial Saugandhika lotuses. And this lake was the sporting region of the high-souled Kuvera, the king of the Yakshas. And it was held in high regard by the Gandharvas the Apsaras and the celestials. And it was frequented by the celestial sages and the Yakshas and the Kimpurushas and the Rakshasas and the Kinnaras; Hundreds and thousands of Rakshasas, named Krodhavasas, were guarding that lake, wearing uniforms and armed with various weapons.Ashtavakras expeditionsSection 13:19 describes sage Ashtavakras expedition to this territory:-The illustrious Ashtavakra set out on his journey.  He proceeded more and more towards the north and at last reached the Himavat mountains peopled by Siddhas and CharanasArrived at the Himavat mountains, that foremost of Brahamanas then came upon the sacred river Vahuda whose waters produce great merit. He rested for some more time by the side of that lake in the course of the Vahuda whose shores he had reached.  Refreshed by such rest, he set out from that region and then proceeded towards Kailasa. He then beheld a gate of gold. He saw also the Mandakini and the Nalini of the high-souled Kubera, the Lord of Treasures.  Beholding the Rishi arrived there, all the Rakshasas having Manibhadra for their head, who were engaged in protecting that lake abounding with beautiful lotuses, came out in a body for welcoming and honouring the illustrious traveller.More information on the regionSection 5:111:-Because all the treasures of the north stretches in a line towards the east and the west, therefore is the north sometimes called the central region. Hither, is the asylum, known by the name of Vadari Badrinath. It was here, on the breast of Kailasa, that Kubera, was installed on the sovereignty of the Rakshasas, the Yakshas, and the Gandharvas. It is in this region that (Kuveras gardens called) Chitraratha lie, and it is here that the asylum of (the Munis called the) Vaikhanasas is situate. It is here, that the celestial stream called Mandakini, and the mountain Mandara are to be seen. It is here that the gardens called Saugandhi-kanaka are always guarded by the Rakshasas. Here are many plains covered with grassy verdure, as also the plantain forest, and those celestial trees called the Sautanakas. It is in this region that the mountains of Kailasa lie, the abode of Ailavila (Kuvera). It is here that the ten Apsaras known by the name of Vidyutprabha had their origin. Here, in this quarter, at a place called Usiravija, by the side of the golden lake, king Marutta performed, a sacrifice. It is here that the brilliant and shining gold mines of Himavat exhibit themselves to the illustrious and regenerate Rishi Jimuta and hence known by the name of the Jaimuta gold. At (14:16) Pandavas were mentioned as mining this gold.The region, called Mandakini, of king Vaisravana is attained by those highly blessed persons for whom are every joy and comfort. There Gandharvas and Yakshas and Apsaras live (13:102).The spot where Ganga rusheth past, cleaving the foremost of mountains which is frequented by Gandharvas and Yakshas and Rakshasas and Apsaras, and inhabited by hunters, and Kinnaras, is called Gangadwara (3:90).Delicious and cooling breezes murmuring through forests of tall Mandaras, and bearing fragrance of extensive plantations of jasmine, as also of the lotuses on the bosom of the river Alaka and of the Nandana-gardens, always minister to the pleasure of the King of the Yakshas. (2,10).On the south of Nishadha is the Varsha called Hiranmaya where is the river called Hiranwati. There, liveth that foremost of birds named Garuda. And the people there, are all followers of the Yakshas, wealthy, and of handsome features (6:8).*Brahma-vodhya, and Vrihadvati were mentioned as rivers of Yaksha regions (6:9).*Arjuna had encountered Yakshas in Khandava forests.*Karna had encountered Yakshas in Mahendra mountains.*Yakshas were mentioned to be dwelling on the northern banks of river Saraswati (9:37).King Vaisravana (Kubera)The banks of river Narmada is described as the birth place of Yaksha king Kuvera (Vaisravana), where his father Visravas, who was a sage, lived (MBh 3,89). King Vaisravana or Kubera was the ruler of Lanka which was guarded by hosts of Rakshasas. He had a chariot called Pushpaka capable of going everywhere according to the will of the rider. And the kingship of the Yakshas and the sovereignty over sovereigns were also his (2,272). Rakshasa Ravana defeated Kuvera in battle and obtained from him the sovereignty of Lanka. That adorable Being, leaving Lanka and followed by Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshasas, and Kinnaras, went to live on mount Gandhamadana (near Kailasa, Tibet). And Ravana forcibly took from him the celestial chariot Pushpaka.The lord Kuvera of body resembling pure gold, seated on his car of great splendour, and accompanied by numerous Yakshas came there. And the lord of treasures, possessed of great beauty, came there to see Arjuna, illuminating the firmament with his effulgence. (3:41).At (3:160) is mentioned an encounter between Pandava Bhima and the Yaksha army. Here Krodhovasa Rakshasas were mentioned as part of Kuberas army. Maniman is mentioned as a friend of Kubera and a leader of the army. Kubera came to see Bhima the destroyer of his army.*Kubera is sometimes mentioned as Ailavila (5:139).*Kubera had a son named Nalakubera (9:47).SthunakarnaAnother prominent Yaksha found mention in Mahabharata is Sthunakarna. He dwelt in a forest close to the Kingdom. He converted Shikhandini, the daughter of Panchala king Drupada into a male by exchanging his male sexuality with her. Here the Yaksha is addressed as a Guhyaka, the one who dwells in caves or in hidden places.There was a dense and solitary forest that was the haunt of a very formidable Yaksha called Sthunakarna. From fear of that Yaksha men never went into that forest. And within it stood a mansion with high walls and a gateway, plastered over with powdered earth, and rich with smoke bearing the fragrance of fried paddy. Entering that mansion, Sikhandini, the daughter of Drupada, began to reduce herself by foregoing all food for many days. Thereupon, the Yaksha named Sthuna, who was endued with kindness, showed himself unto her (5,194).Mystification of YakshasAt (3:310) of Mahabharata is a conversation of a Yaksha and Pandava king Yudhisthira. Here Yaksha is described as a crane, sitting by a pond(Questions of the Yaksha, on Hindupedia, the Hindu Encyclopedia).Manibhadras, and Vaisravana (Kubera), the king of the Yaksha were worshipped by travellers who travel through lonely territories, for protection against dangers. Manibhadra is one of the warrior in the Yaksha army of Kubera. Gandharvas were also part of his army (3:65).At (3:229) this is more clear:-The man who beholds Devas while sleeping, or in a wakeful state soon turns mad, and the spirit under whose influence these hallucinations take place is called the Deva spirit. When a person beholds his dead ancestors while he is seated at ease, or lying in his bed, he soon loses his reason, and the spirit which causes this illusion of sensible perception, is called the ancestral spirit. The man who shows disrespect to the Siddhas and who is cursed by them in return, soon runs mad and the evil influence by which this is brought about, is called the Siddha spirit. And the spirit by whose influence a man smells sweet odour, and becomes cognisant of various tastes (when there are no odoriferous or tasteful substances about him) and soon becomes tormented, is called the Rakshasa spirit. And the spirit by whose action celestial musicians (Gandharvas) blend their existence into the constitution of a human being, and make him run mad in no time, is called the Gandharva spirit.  And that evil spirit by whose influence men are always tormented by Pisachas, is called the Paisacha spirit. When the spirit of Yakshas enters into the system of a human being by some accident, he loses his reason immediately, and such a spirit is called the Yaksha spirit.It is known that excepting the first forty seconds the grey twilight preceding nightfall hath been appointed for the wandering of the Yakshas, the Gandharvas and the Rakshasas, all of whom are capable of going everywhere at will (1,172).Other references*The Yakshas, milking the Earth, got the power of disappearance at will (7,67).*The royal Kuvera, the chief of the Yakshas and the Rakshasas, is the lord of the treasury of Indra (12:289).*Rishi Yaksha of great intelligence succeeded in restoring the Niruktas which had disappeared from the surface of the Earth and sunk into nether regions (12:342).*Mankanaka is mentioned as a Yaksha and one of the gate keepers of Kubera (3:83).*Manibhadra is mentioned as the king of Yakshas at (3:64).*At Kusasthali once there was held a conclave of the Devas. And surrounded by grimvisaged Yakshas, numbering 300 maha-padmas, carrying various weapons, Kubera attended that conclave. (3:160).*The great Yaksha Amogha with his attendantsthe Jambhaka Yakshas and other Rakshasas were mentioned as army men of Kartikeya, in his battle with Asura Mahisha (3:230). (Mahisha himself was the son of an Asura in his wife belonging to the Yaksha tribe.)*Garuda had encounters with the Yakshas viz. Aswakranda of great courage, Rainuka, the bold Krathanaka, Tapana, Uluka, Swasanaka, Nimesha, Praruja, and Pulina.*Siva is mentioned as the friend of Kubera (12:284).List of exotic tribes*Devas (Rudras, Maruts, Vasus, Adityas)*Asuras (Daityas, Danavas, Kalakeyas)*Pisachas, Gandharvas, Kimpurushas, Kinnaras, Yakshas*Rakshasas*Vanaras*Nagas, Suparnas*BhutasSee also*of Ancient India*Tribes of Ancient India*Kingdom*Kingdom*Rakshasas*Gandharvas*Cyaxares of Medes*KshatriyasReferences*Mahabharata of Dwaipayana Vyasa, translated to English by Kisari Mohan Ganguli
4417124
Uranium_market
thumb|right|350px|11 countries are responsible for 97 % of the global uranium extraction in 2007.The uranium market, like all markets, has a history of volatility, moving not only with the standard forces of and demand, but also to whims of geopolitics. It has also evolved particularities of its own in response to the unique nature and use of this material.The only significant commercial use for uranium is to fuel reactors for the generation of electricity. There are 440 reactors operating worldwide, and a total of 60 new reactors that are under construction, with over 150 power reactors (with a total net capacity of some 172,000 MWe) planned and over 340 more proposed (as of August 2011)().Before uranium is ready for use as fuel in reactors, it must undergo a number of intermediary processing steps which are identified as the front end of the fuel cycle: mining it (either underground or in pit mines), milling it into yellowcake, enriching it and finally fuel fabrication to produce fuel assemblies or bundles. This technologically complicated and challenging process is simple in comparison to the complexity of the market that has evolved to provide these three services.Available supplyuranium spot price in US$ per pound. The 2007 price peak is clearly visible.()thumb|260px|The Estimate of Available Uranium depends on what resources are included in the estimate. The squares represent relative sizes of different estimates, whereas the numbers at the lower edge show how long the given resource would last at present consumption. Reserves in current mines() Known economic reserves() Conventional undiscovered resources() Total ore resources at 2004 prices( Unconventional resources (at least 4 billion tons, could last for millennia)(The worlds present measured resources of uranium, economically recoverable at a price of USD$130/kg, are enough to last for some 80 years at current consumption.(In 1983, physicist Bernard Cohen proposed that the world supply of uranium is effectively inexhaustible, and could therefore be considered a form of energy.()()  He claims that breeder reactors, fueled by naturally-replenished uranium extracted from seawater, could supply energy at least as long as the suns expected remaining lifespan of five billion years.(  These reactors use uranium-238, which is more common than the uranium-235 required by conventional reactors.Market operationsUnlike other metals such as copper or nickel, uranium is not traded on an organized exchange such as the Metal Exchange. Instead it is traded in most cases through contracts negotiated directly between a buyer and a seller.  Recently, however, the York Mercantile Exchange announced a 10-year agreement to provide for the trade of on and off exchange uranium futures contracts.The structure of uranium supply contracts varies widely. Pricing can be as simple as a single fixed price, or based on various reference prices with economic corrections built in. Contracts traditionally specify a base price, such as the uranium spot price, and rules for escalation. In base-escalated contracts, the buyer and seller agree on a base price that escalates over time on the basis of an agreed-upon formula, which may take economic indices, such as GDP or inflation factors, into consideration. A spot market contract usually consists of just one delivery and is typically priced at or near the published spot market price at the time of purchase. However 85% of all uranium has been sold under long-term, multi-year contracts with deliveries starting one to three years after the contract is made. Long-term contract terms range from two to 10 years, but typically run three to five years, with the first delivery occurring within 24 months of contract award. They may also include a clause that allows the buyer to vary the size of each delivery within prescribed limits. For example, delivery quantities may vary from the prescribed annual volume by plus or minus 15%.  One of the peculiarities of the nuclear fuel cycle is the way in which utilities with nuclear power plants buy their fuel. Instead of buying fuel bundles from the fabricator, the usual approach is to purchase uranium in all of these intermediate forms. Typically, a fuel buyer from power utilities will contract separately with suppliers at each step of the process. Sometimes, the fuel buyer may purchase uranium product, the end product of the first three stages, and contract separately for fabrication, the fourth step to eventually obtain the fuel in a form that can be loaded into the reactor. The utilities believe  rightly or wrongly  that these options offers them the best price and service. They will typically retain two or three suppliers for each stage of the fuel cycle, who compete for their business by tender. Sellers consist of suppliers in each of the four stages as well as brokers and traders. There are fewer than 100 companies that buy and sell uranium in the western world.In addition to being sold in different forms, uranium markets are differentiated by geography. The global trading of uranium has evolved into two distinct marketplaces shaped by historical and political forces. The first, the western world marketplace comprises the Americas, Europe and Australia. A separate marketplace comprises countries within the former Union, or the of Independent States (CIS), Europe and China. Most of the fuel requirements for power plants in the CIS are supplied from the CISs own stockpiles. Often producers within the CIS also supply uranium and fuel products to the western world, increasing competition. The SWU (separative work unit) Separative Work Unit (SWU) is a complex unit which is a function of the amount of uranium processed and the degree to which it is enriched, i.e. the extent of increase in the concentration of the 235U isotope relative to the remainder. Separative work is expressed in SWUs, kg SW, or kg UTA (from the German Urantrennarbeit )The unit is strictly: Kilogram Separative Work Unit, and it measures the quantity of separative work (indicative of energy used in enrichment) when feed, tails and product quantities are expressed in kilograms. The number of Separative Work Units provided by an enrichment facility is directly related to the amount of energy that the facility consumes. Modern gaseous diffusion plants typically require 2,400 to 2,500 kilowatt-hours of electricity per SWU while gas centrifuge plants require just 50 to 60 kilowatt-hours of electricity per SWU.Example:A large nuclear power station with a net electrical capacity of 1,300 MW requires about 25,000 kg of enriched uranium annually with a  235U concentration of 3.75%. This quantity is produced from about 210,000 kg of raw uranium using about 120,000 SWU. An enrichment plant with a capacity of 1,000 kSWU/year is, therefore, able to enrich the uranium needed to fuel about eight large nuclear power stationsCost IssuesIn addition to the Separative Work Units provided by an enrichment facility, the other important parameter that must be considered is the mass of raw uranium that is needed in to order to yield a desired mass of enriched uranium. As with the number of SWUs, the amount of feed material required will also depend on the level of enrichment desired and upon the amount of 235U that ends up in the uranium. However, unlike the number of SWUs required during enrichment which increases with decreasing levels of 235U in the depleted stream, the amount of raw uranium needed will decrease with decreasing levels of 235U that end up in the tails.Example:In the production of enriched uranium for use in a light water reactor it is typical for the enriched stream to contain 3.6% 235U (as compared to 0.7% in raw uranium) while the depleted stream contains 0.2% to 0.3% 235U. In order to produce one kilogram of this enriched uranium it would require approximately 8 kilograms of raw uranium and 4.5 SWU if the tails stream was allowed to have 0.3% 235U. On the other hand, if the depleted stream had only 0.2% 235U, then it would require just 6.7 kilograms of raw uranium, but nearly 5.7 SWU of enrichment. Because the amount of raw uranium required and the number of SWUs required during enrichment change in opposite directions, if raw uranium is cheap and enrichment services are more expensive, then the operators will typically choose to allow more 235U to be left in the tails stream whereas if raw uranium is more expensive and enrichment is less so, then they would choose the opposite.*Uranium Enrichment Calculator designed by: the WISE Uranium ProjectHistoryThe worlds top uranium producers are Canada (28% of world production) and Australia (23%).  Other major producers include Kazakhstan, Russia, Namibia and Niger http://www.uxc.com/fuelcycle/uranium/production-uranium.html.  Purification facilities are almost always located at the mining sites. The facilities for enrichment, on the other hand, are found in those countries that produce significant amounts of electricity from nuclear power. Large commercial enrichment plants are in operation in France, Germany, Netherlands, UK, USA, and Russia, with smaller plants elsewhere. These nations form the core of the uranium market and influence considerable control over all buyers. The uranium market is a classic sellers market. The uranium cartel, as it became known, was the alliance of the major uranium producing nations. Representatives of these five countries met in Paris, France in February, 1972 to discuss the orderly marketing of uranium. Although sounding innocuous, they had, amongst themselves, a monopoly in the uranium market and were deciding to exercise it.Global demand for uranium rose steadily from the end of War II, largely driven by weapons procurement programs.  This trend lasted until the early 1980s, when changing geopolitical circumstances as well as environmental, safety, economic concerns over nuclear power plants reduced demand somewhat. The production of a series of large hydro-electric power stations has also helped to depress the global market since the early 1970s. This phenomenon can be traced back to the construction of the vast Dam in Egypt, and to a certain extent with the ambitious Gorges Dam in China. During this time, large uranium inventories accumulated. In fact, until 1985 the Western uranium industry was producing material much faster than nuclear power plants and military programs were consuming it. Uranium prices slid throughout the decade with few respites, leaving the price below $10 per pound for yellowcake by year-end 1989. As uranium prices fell, producers began curtailing operations or exiting the business entirely, leaving only a few actively involved in uranium mining and causing uranium inventories to shrink significantly. Since 1990 uranium requirements have outstripped uranium production. World uranium requirements are expected to increase steadily throughout the next decade to a peak of over 200 million pounds of yellowcake.However several factors are pushing both industrialized and developing nations towards energy sources. The increasing rate of consumption of fuel is a concern for nations lacking in reserves, especially non-OPEC nations. The other issue is the level of pollution produced by coal-burning plants, and despite their vastness, an absence of economical methods for tapping into solar, wind-driven, or tidal reserves. Uranium suppliers hope that this will mean an increase in market share and an increase in volume over the long term.Uranium prices reached an all-time low in 2001, costing US$7/lb. This was followed by a period of gradual rise, followed by a bubble culminating in mid-2007, which caused the price to peak at around 137$/lb.() This was the highest price (adjusted for inflation) in 25 years.(www.uxc.com) The higher price during the bubble has spurred new prospecting and reopening of old mines. Cameco and Tinto Group are the top two producing companies (with 20% of the production each), followed by Areva (12%), Billiton (9%) and Kazatomprom (9%).See also*of countries by uranium reserves*mining*of uranium mines*nuclear fuel*uranium*nuclear material*to Megawatts Program*bubble of 2007*Participation CorporationReferencesExternal links* Uranium 101: Markets*Uranium prices from UxC*NYMEX Uranium Futures*Uranium prices from TradeTech*Uraniums reaction to a nuclear future, Telegraph, 30 August 2007*Real Time Uranium Pricesde:Uranwirtschaft
4422313
Second_Malaysia_Plan
Image:Rubber dripping.jpg|thumb|Crop diversification was introduced during the Second Malaysia Plan, phasing out rubber in favour of palm.The Second Malaysia Plan (In language: Rancangan Malaysia Kedua) was an economic development plan introduced by the government of Malaysia with the goal of implementing the New Economic Policy (NEP). It lasted from 1971 to 1975 and aimed to restructure the society of Malaysia and reduce Chinese and foreign dominance in the of Malaysia so as to improve the economic position of the Malays.(Shuid, Mahdi & Yunus, Mohd. Fauzi (2001). Malaysian Studies, p. 85. Longman. ISBN 983-74-2024-3.) It was the successor to the Malaysia Plan, which was also intended to specifically tackle the problem of poverty among the Malays. However, the First Malaysia Plan had limited success, which may have been a factor in the 13 Incident in 1969 when riots broke out in Lumpur. The Second Malaysia Plan was regarded by some as excessive in its zeal to increase Malay participation in the economy, and the government accordingly scaled back the emphasis on restructuring the economy when the plan ended. Background Although the Malays have nearly always comprised a majority of the Malaysian population, their economic power has rarely been commensurate. In 1970, the Bumiputra controlled only 1.9% of the Malaysian economy, while the non-Malays (mostly Chinese) held 37.4%, with the rest in foreign hands.(Henderson, John William, Vreeland, Nena, Dana, Glenn B., Hurwitz, Geoffrey B., Just, Peter, Moeller, Philip W. & Shinn, R.S. (1977). Area Handbook for Malaysia, p. 323. American University, Washington D.C., Foreign Area Studies. LCCN 771294.) Due to this wide disparity, Article 153 of the Constitution requires the government to set quotas for the dispensation of scholarships, employment in the civil service, etc. targeted at improving the economic status of the Malays.However, the Malaysia Planwhose approach had been dependent on the Malays availing themselves of these facilities and services and putting them to good usefailed in addressing the economic imbalance.(Henderson, et al., pp. 147149, 322.) Its policies also resulted in discontent among the non-Malays, who mostly supported the opposition parties that favoured reducing or eliminating action for the Bumiputra in the 1969 general election. A victory parade held on May 12 by supporters of the opposition led to a retaliatory rally on May 13 by the Malays National Organisation (UMNO), a major party in the governing Alliance coalition. However, the rally soon turned into a riot which lasted two days. Officially, around 200 people diedalthough others have given much larger estimateswith thousands left homeless, the majority of them Chinese. A state of emergency was declared, and Parliament was suspended. The Operations Council (NOC) governed until 1971, when Parliament reconvened.(Means, Gordon P. (1991). Malaysian Politics: The Second Generation, pp. 79. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-588988-6.)While it held the reins of power, the NOC set out the NEP, with the ultimate aim of eradicating poverty and eliminating the identification of race with economic function through a rapidly expanding economy; the NEP aimed for a Bumiputra share of 30% of the economy within 20 years.(Means, p. 24.) The Outline Perspective Plan was also approved, with similar goals to the NEP. Both the NEP and the Outline Perspective Plan were set to expire in 1990, and the Second Malaysia Plan was passed by Parliament to implement the goals of these policies.(Henderson, et al., p. 294.) Economic restructuring The Second Malaysia Plan stepped up government involvement in the economy, with the main goal of increasing Malay economic interests, especially in the areas of manufacturing and mining.(Henderson, et al., p. 324.) In order to avoid directly hurting Chinese economic interests, the plan focused on huge economic growth, with the goal of expanding both the Malay and non-Malay shares of the economy in absolute terms, while increasing the Malay share in relative terms as well.(Henderson, et al., p. 6.)A sum of M$7.25 billion in total was allocated for the Second Malaysia Plan. Although this constituted a decrease from the First Malaysia Plans allocation of M$10.5 billion, the Second Malaysia Plan hoped to achieve greater reduction in poverty and increase the involvement of the Malays in the private sector by imposing certain restrictions on private firms that would benefit Malay employment and economic ownership.(Shuid & Yunus, p. 86, 87.)At the time the plan was announced, the non-Malays had, in the words of one commentator, a virtual monopoly of private industrial and commercial employment, and were concentrated in the urban areas. However, foreign interests controlled most modern industries, including manufacturing, banking, finance, rubber, and tin. The Malays were largely involved in rural occupations such as rice farming, fishing, tending to rubber or palm smallholdings, and so on. They were conspicuously absent from even minor white collar jobs, such as clerical work, and only in the civil service, where they were guaranteed 80% of all government jobs, were they present in the upper portion of the hierarchy. Most members of some professions, such as medicine and law, were non-Malay. Ironically, government policies, such as those set out by Article 153, appeared to hinder Malay involvement in the private sector by giving them preference in only the public sector. Unemployment among all races was also rampant, largely due to poor education, with about 70% of the 275,000 unemployed in 1970 being aged between 15 and 25 years. It was all this that the NEP and the Second Malaysia Plan set out to change.(Henderson, et al., pp. 37, 9092.) Industrialisation Several government agencies that had been established prior to the advent of the Second Malaysia Plan increased their participation in the economy during the Second Malaysia Plan. These agencies included the Industrial Development Authority (MIDA) and Amanah Rakyat (MARA). Several more were also established under the plan, including the Perbadanan Nasional (PERNAS, or the National Trading Corporation), State Economic Development Corporation and the Development Authority (UDA).(Henderson, et al., p. 322.)Image:Trishaw malacca.jpg|thumb|At the beginning of the Second Malaysia Plan, the private sector employed mostly Chinese; however, they had no real ownership stake in modern industries.PERNAS was established to purchase businesses and participate in joint ventures with private companies, as well as to develop nascent industries to be held in trust until the Malays held sufficient capital to take them over. By the end of the plans tenure, PERNAS owned 100% of eight companies involved in insurance, trading, construction, properties, engineering, securities, and mining. Joint ventures had also been formed with the private sector to develop the mining, containerisation, tourism and consulting industries.(Parliament passed the Industrial Coordination Act during the Second Malaysia Plan, which required all new manufacturing enterprises with M$100,000, or twenty-five or more workers, to be licensed by the Minister of Trade and Industry. To obtain such a licence, each firm had to meet certain conditions set by the Ministry, which could vary. Malaysian Chinese manufacturers were concerned about the act, as they had operated with minimal control from the government before. Nevertheless, the government stated the act was not meant to be detrimental towards any group, and went ahead with its implementation. Under the act, firms were divided into three categories: firms approved after 1 January 1972, firms approved before then, and firms operating without approval from the Ministry. All firms subject to the act were required to submit a proposal to the Ministry stating how they planned to achieve the long-term target of achieving 30% Malay and 70% non-Malay Malaysian ownership in the company. Proposals that were accepted then became the guidelines for how the relevant company would operate.(Henderson, et al., pp. 323, 325.)Until the Second Malaysia Plan, industry was concentrated on the west coast of Malaysia. The plan thus moved to establish new industrial estates on the east coast, in order to curb rural-urban migrationthe east coast was considerably less urbanised than the west coast.(Henderson, et al., p. 325.)By 1975, manufacturing activities constituted 16% of the Malaysian Domestic Product (GDP), one per cent short of the target of the Second Malaysia Plan. Manufacturing grew negligibly in 1975, attributed by the government to the global recession that year. This contrasted with the 15% growth achieved in 1974, which well exceeded the target of 12.5% growth per year during the Second Malaysia Plan. Food, wood products, and chemical products made up the majority of the manufacturing sector. The substantial growth in manufacturing during this period has been attributed to the governments establishment of free trade zones, where any goods brought in would not be subject to customs duties, and goods could be freely exported abroad or transferred to another free trade zone. In 1974, such zones were declared in the states of Penang, Selangor, and Malacca. The industries located in these zones were mostly electronics-, rubber product- and textile-based.(Henderson, et al., pp. 331332, 339.) Mining Until the late 1970s, Malaysia was the worlds foremost producer of tin, supplying roughly 40% of the non-communist worlds tin. Nevertheless, tin reserves were declining; minings contribution to the GDP was projected to fall 13% over the course of the Second Malaysia Plan, due to the exhaustion of tin and iron reserves. However, bauxite and copper continued to contribute to the mining sector in the early 1970s. Malay participation in the mining sector was minimal, and as much as 70% of the industry remained under foreign control.(Henderson, et al., pp. 325, 327.) This was a legacy of the British colonial era; many British firms, which had arrived in the 19th century to exploit Malaysian mineral resources, had not departed yet. Malay participation in the mining sectorespecially in tinwas further hampered by the British tendency in the 19th century to bring in cheap Chinese labour; most of those employed in mining were still Chinese as late as 1970.((Mispari, Masariah binti, Abdul Wahab, Johara binti & Hasan, Ridzuan bin (2003). Sejarah Tingkatan 2, pp. 141, 142. Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. ISBN 983-62-7831-1.)Petroleum or oil began to significantly contribute to the Malaysian economy in the 1970s, as new oil rigs and refineries were set up. By 1975, total production of crude oil stood at , most of it produced by Shell. In 1974, the exclusive right to own, explore and exploit petroleum in Malaysia was vested in the government enterprise of Petronas. The following year, Petronas was granted sole rights over the marketing and distribution of all petroleum products and a provision to control other companies without taking an ownership stake in them, through the issuance of management shares to Petronas.(Henderson, et al., pp. 329, 331.)The number of Malays employed in the mining sector soared from 1970 onwards, as the governments restructuring policies came into force. When the Second Malaysia Plan began, less than 200,000 Malays were employed in the mining industry. By 1990, they numbered nearly a million, well ahead of the target numbers originally outlined.(Snodgrass, Donald R. (1991). Successful Economic Development in a Multi-Ethnic Society: The Malaysian Case. Retrieved February 17, 2006.) Licences for mining operations were specially reserved for Malays as part of the drive to increase their ownership level in the mining industry.(Heng, Pek Koon (1997). THE NEW ECONOMIC POLICY AND THE CHINESE COMMUNITY IN PENINSULAR MALAYSIA. Retrieved February 17, 2006. ) The government also ostensibly increased Bumiputra ownership by nationalising several formerly foreign mining companiesby 1989, state corporations controlled 60% of the mining industry.(Aslam, Mohamed & Hassan, Asan Ali Golam (2003). DEVELOPMENT PLANNING AND REGIONAL IMBALANCES IN MALAYSIA. Retrieved February 17, 2006.) The government was also aided by the fact that petroleum soon eclipsed other minerals in the mining sectoras Petronas was a state-owned corporation, it was also considered a Bumiputra enterprise. However, the government has been criticised for this practice, as it is argued nationalised corporations belong to the public at large, and not only to the Bumiputra.(Kamarudin, Raja Petra (March 22, 2005). The need for a marriage counsellor. Today.) Agriculture The Second Malaysia Plan continued the initiatives that previous five year plans, such as the Malayan Five Year Plan, had taken. Although expenditure on other development increased substantially, by about M$1 million, funding for rural development was also increased. The Second Malaysia Plan focused on diversifying crops grown in Malaysia; the 1974 Green Book Program aimed to make Malaysia self-sufficient in food production by encouraging farmers to grow vegetables, such as beans, chilies, etc., and rear livestockthe Veterinary Department going as far as to distribute cattle. Fertilisers, seedlings, insecticides and herbicides were subsidised. Double-cropping of rice was encouraged, so farmers could harvest twice in one year and effectively double their output.(Kamil, Nik Fuad, Alwi, Syed Abdillah & Singh, Mukhtiar (1996). MALAYSIA. Retrieved February 16, 2006.)(Butz, William & DaVanzo, Julie (1998). First Malaysian Family Life Survey, 19761977. Retrieved February 16, 2006.)(Mohd. Arshad, Fatimah & Shamsudin, Mad Nasir (1997). Rural Development Model in Malaysia. Retrieved February 16, 2006.) The Organization Authority was established in 1973 with the goal of coordinating agricultural cooperatives, farmers associations, and government agricultural agencies.(Henderson, et al., pp. 307, 308.)Growth in small-scale agriculture was viewed as crucial to creating jobs and reducing rural poverty, and government agencies such as FELDA (the Federal Land Development Authority) vastly increased the scope and size of their development programs. RISDA (the Rubber Industries Smallholder Development Agency) was given the task of diversifying smallholder estates; RISDA set itself the ambitious goal of developing  during the Second Malaysia Plan. The main aim was to diversify into oil through the planting of palms. The Malaysian economy relied heavily on rubber at the timeat its peak, Malaya (Peninsular Malaysia) alone produced more than half of the worlds rubber. However, Great Depression, which depressed rubber prices, greatly set back the Malayan economy. The Malaysian government thus aimed to avert another incident by diversifying the agriculture sector. However, RISDA overreached itself in attempting to so quickly reappropriate land; by the end of the Second Malaysia Plan, only  had been developed, with only half this number comprising oil palm estates.(Henderson, et al., p. 309, 311.)(Mispari, Abdul Wahab & Hasan, p. 131, 133.)The land development and resettlement policies instituted by the government, however, failed to make an impact on rural poverty. The government managed to resettle only 40,000 people, despite an estimated 535,000 families engaged in agriculture living below the poverty level. Due to inefficiencies in the program, the beneficiaries of resettlement and development were not always those with the greatest need. It was also alleged by some that there had been too much emphasis on the difficult process of resettlement and development of new areas, instead of increasing productivity in existing farms. Matters were complicated by the Constitution, which gave the states much control over land development, and thus requiring the federal government to negotiate with individual state governments. Non-Malay rural families also did not benefit much due to this, as the Constitution reserved portions of land for the Malays, and state governments were not anxious to receive destitute non-Malays.(Henderson, et al., pp. 311312.)Although the Second Malaysia Plan greatly modernised the rice bowl states of Kedah and Perlisvirtually eliminating the water buffalo by replacing it with tractorsmost smallholders and individual farmers did not benefit technology-wise. In the corporate agriculture sector, the Malays held only a 0.3% stake, as opposed to 70.8% held by foreign interests. In the noncorporate sector, the Malays held 47.1%. Due to limited capital, many Malays were still engaged in lower productivity activities as the Second Malaysia Plan ended.(Henderson, et al., p. 313.) Health The Second Malaysia Plan continued past initiatives in raising nutritional levels through a number of programs. These included incentives to grow nutritious food, instruction in nutrition and menu planning, and provision of food for groups with the highest rates of malnutrition. However, these programs were hindered by a lack of trained medical personnel.(Henderson, et al., p. 36.)Although planning was established as a national goal in 1964, efforts during the Second Malaysia Plan to promote it were hampered by government neglect. Much of the success achieved by the National Family Planning Board occurred during the years of the Malaysia Plan (19661970). The Second Malaysia Plan hoped to add 600,000 new users of family planning techniques, but the facilities and personnel provided were inadequate. The topic was viewed as rather sensitive by the government, and thus family planning was mostly ignored.(Henderson, et al., p. 35, 36.) Ironically, in 1984 Prime Minister bin Mohamad effectively eliminated family planning as a government policy by announcing the National Population Policy, which targeted a 70 million population by 2100up from 12.6 million in 1984.(Chin, Christine B.N. (1998). In Service and Servitude. Retrieved February 15, 2006.) Education Although education was mostly sidelined in favour of socieconomic restructuring programs during the Second Malaysia Plan, some important initiatives were taken during its tenure.(Henderson, et al., p. 165.) In 1970, Malay, the national language, became the major medium of instruction from primary to tertiary level, replacing English. British standardised examinations were replaced with local ones, and new Malay-language textbooks were introduced. By the end of the plan, most formerly English-based schools had converted the first four years of instruction entirely to the new Malay-medium curriculum.(Henderson, et al., p. 171.)In 1973, the Curriculum Development Centre was established. Its goal was to coordinate projects to reform the curriculum that had previously been handled by varying government departments. It also began revamping the curriculum for science and mathematics, and began a new program to review the various science curricula.(Henderson, et al., p. 170.)The Second Malaysia Plan also hoped to increase the availability of vocational and technical training. Despite some attempts, little progress was made in improving the curriculum, which focused on providing a general education and made little room for vocational or technical training. Several new technical and vocational schools were built under the Second Malaysia Plan, with seven institutions alone completed in 1975. It was hoped this would alleviate the problem of unemployment, especially among the youth.(Henderson, et al., pp. 169170, 174.) Transportation The Second Malaysia Plan aimed to modernise Malaysian railroads, which the government regarded as crucial to development and industry. All trains were converted to use the more efficient fuel, and the government increased allocations for maintenance and modernisation of the rail infrastructure. In particular, emphasis was placed on upgrading existing stock, roadbeds, and repair facilities.(Henderson, et al., p. 29.)Air service was expanded under the plan, which paid for the purchase of all-weather and night traffic control equipment, as well as the training of staff to handle the equipment. The Second Malaysia Plan also saw Malaysia-Singapore Airlines split into the Airline System (MAS) and Airlines (SIA).(Henderson, et al., pp. 2930.)The Second Malaysia Plan also saw the introduction of containerisation in Malaysia to better facilitate transportation. The plan called for the establishment of a national haulage company to handle inland transport; in August 1971, Kontena Nasional Berhad (National Containers Limited) was established by the government. In December, M.V. Benavon became the first container vessel to dock in Malaysia, at the North Terminal of Klang in Selangor.(Tengku Mahmud Shah Al-haj, Tengku Jamaluddin Bin (2003). LIBERALIZATION OF THE CONTAINER HAULAGE INDUSTRY IN MALAYSIA. Retrieved February 17, 2006.)At the time of the Second Malaysia Plan, there were only two sea ports in Malaysia; one in Penang, and one in Klang. The plan called for the construction of two new ports, both in peninsular Malaysia; one would be in Johor, and another would be in Kuantan, a major town in Pahang. The two main objectives of these projects were to meet increasing demand for sea transportation of freight, and to bring development to underdeveloped states. Port was completed in 1977, while Port began full operations in 1984.(Bajpai, Nirupam & Shastri, Vanita (1999). Port Development in Tamil Nadu: Lessons from Chinese Provinces. Retrieved February 17, 2006.) Legacy At the end of the Second Malaysia Plan, the poverty rate was found to have declined from 49% to 43%. Unemployment improved slightly, decreasing from 7.5% to 7.4%. Great strides were made in increasing Bumiputra involvement in the private sector, however; the employment rate of Bumiputra in the manufacturing sector increased from 29% to 33%, and from 24% to 34% in the commercial sector. Bumiputra equity ownership more than doubled from 3% to 7.8%. However, this was considered unsatisfactory by many, especially as much of the progress had been made by government enterprises holding the equity in trust.(Henderson, et al., pp. 295296.) Although the plan had initially targeted a GDP growth rate of 12.5% a year, only an average of 11% was managed. The growth was extremely uneven; while in 1973 GDP grew by 27%, in 1975, it grew a paltry 3% due to the global recession at the time.(Henderson, et al., p. 285.) Despite the governments efforts to tackle unemployment, creating 600,000 new jobs during the Second Malaysia Plan, the number of unemployed actually increased between 1970 and 1975; in 1970, there were 275,000 unemployed, but by 1975, the number stood at 324,000.(Henderson, et al., p. 37.)The Second Malaysia Plan was also forced to confront an unexpected problem: inflation. Between 1972 and 1975, the price index (CPI) unexpectedly increased by 40%. In 1974, the inflation rate averaged 18%, although it was reduced to 7% by 1975.(Henderson, et al., p. 150.) This new conundrum was therefore considered by the government when it set out the Third Malaysia Plan (19761980).Another overarching consequence of the Second Malaysia Plan was its efforts in crop diversification. Despite RISDA failing to meet its targets, the oil industry in Malaysia continued to grow. By 1998, palm oil was the second-largest contributor towards Malaysias GDP, second only to electronics products.(Crude Palm Oil Futures. Retrieved February 16, 2006. )Overall, the Second Malaysia Plan made much more substantial progress towards reducing the inequity in the economy than its predecessor had. However, the emphasis on improving the lot of the Malays greatly worried the non-Malays, and when the Third Malaysia Plan was launched, the government toned down its rhetoric on affirmative action and emphasised greater economic growth, which would benefit all.( See also * Malaysia Plan* New Economic Policy Notes  References * Henderson, John William, Vreeland, Nena, Dana, Glenn B., Hurwitz, Geoffrey B., Just, Peter, Moeller, Philip W. & Shinn, R.S. (1977). Area Handbook for Malaysia. American University, Washington D.C., Foreign Area Studies. LCCN 771294.Plan de MalasiaMalaysia KeduaMalaysia Kaping KalihMalaysia Keduazh:
4434613
Asher_Asher
thumb|Dr. Asher AsherAsher Asher (February 16, 1837  January 7, 1889), born in Glasgow, was the first Scottish Jew to enter the medical profession. The only book he published was The Jewish Rite of Circumcision (1873). He died in London, EnglandLifeAsher Asher was educated at the Royal High School. He was a prominent member of the local Jewish congregation, as its Honorary Secretary. Then, he abandoned for studying medicine at the of Edinburgh, graduating as of Medicine in 1856, as the first Jewish doctor of Scotland. He practiced at Glasgow and the nearby Bishopbriggs, a mining town. (http://www.cityfarmer.org/ScotLev.html)In 1862, Asher Asher moved to London and became medical officer of the Board of Guardians, where he helped providing medical care for poor Jews, beside the founder, Dr. Canstatt. (http://www.jewishgen.org/JCR-UK/susser/roth/chseventeen.htm) In 1866 was appointed secretary of the Great Synagogue. About this time the idea of a union of the various London synagogues had been put forward, chiefly by Lionel L. Cohen; and Asher devoted himself to the project with intense energy. In March, 1870, he became first secretary of the Synagogue, contributing largely to the success of that institution &mdash; he wrote the introduction to the by-laws of the constituent synagogues, and practically founded its visitation committee. This office he retained until his death.Owing to Ashers intimate relations with the Rothschilds, in his capacity of medical attendant, unofficial almoner, and personal friend, his advice was generally followed by them in communal matters. He was connected with a large number of institutions in the London community, and may be regarded as one of its organizers. Looking for better conditions for Jewish immigrants, Asher undertook journeys to Palestine, America, and Russia, in company of Montagu. Particularly, Asher was pledged about the Jewish communities of Europe. After the visit to Palestine he also wrote a report on the condition of affairs in Jerusalem, which effected much good. His sympathetic nature attracted to him most of the young men of ability of the rising generation, and upon them he exerted great influence. Asher wrote much for the Jewish press, chiefly under the pen-name Aliquis.Legacy*At the entrance of the Synagogue, a plaque remembers Asher Asher.*Since 1910, the of Glasgow awards the Asher Asher Memorial Medal and Prize, annually for its Ear, Nose and Throat course.*Asher Asher is buried in the United Synagogue Cemetery, at London.External links*Short biography, at the of Glasgow*Asher Asher, at Findagrave.com. References * 
4435786
Tyrannosaurus_in_popular_culture
File:Early dinosaur comic.png|right|thumb|230px|A strip from Comics, a popular webcomic featuring a talking Tyrannosaurus.Tyrannosaurus rex is arguably the most prevalent dinosaur to appear in popular culture.(  It has been frequently represented in film and on television, in literature, and on the internet.General impactTyrannosaurus rex is unique among dinosaurs in its place in modern culture; paleontologist Bakker has called it the most popular dinosaur among people of all ages, all cultures, and all nationalities.() From the beginning, it was embraced by the public. Fairfield Osborn, the President of the Museum of Natural History, billed it the greatest hunter to have ever walked the earth. He stated in 1905,(John Jack Horner and Don Dino Lessem, The Complete T. Rex (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1993), pages 5862)Tyrannosaurus gained widespread public attention on December 30, 1905, when the York Times hailed T. rex as the most formidable fighting animal of which there is any record whatever, the king of all kings in the domain of animal life, the absolute warlord of the earth, and a royal man-eater of the jungle. (Mining for Mammoths in the Badlands: How Tyrannosaurus Rex Was Dug Out of His 8,000,000 Year old Tomb, New York Times, December 3rd, 1905, page SM1.)  In 1906, Tyrannosaurus was dubbed the prize fighter of antiquity and the Last of the Great Reptiles and the King of Them All.(The Prize Fighter of Antiquity Discovered and Restored, The New York Times December 30th, 1906, page 21.)In 1927, R. Knight painted a mural incorporating Tyrannosaurus facing a Triceratops in the Museum of Natural History,(Charles Knight: Prehistoric Visions of a Beloved Muralist 2002 Field Museum, In the Field article by Alexander Sherman) establishing the two dinosaurs as enemies in popular thought;( paleontologist Currie cites this mural as one of his inspirations to study dinosaurs.( Bakker said of the imagined rivalry between Tyrannosaurus and Triceratops, No matchup between predator and prey has ever been more dramatic. Its somehow fitting that those two massive antagonists lived out their co-evolutionary belligerence through the very last days of the very last epoch of the Age of Dinosaurs.(Bakker, R.T. 1986. The Dinosaur Heresies. New York: Kensington Publishing, p. 240. On that page, Bakker has his own T. rex/Triceratops fight.)Film appearancesTyrannosaurus rex has played a major role in many films, starting in 1918 with Ghost of Slumber Mountain, written and directed by motion special effects pioneer OBrien.(T. rex: A Dinosaur in Hollywood (2005 documentary)) The Ghost of Slumber Mountain is also, and most likely, the first film showing Tyrannosaurus facing Triceratops. The king of the tyrant lizards came back in 1925 with the classic adaptation of Conan Doyles novel The Lost World. Tyrannosaurus fossils werent so famous at the time of the publication of the novel (1912), and the only main villain dinosaur on the book was Allosaurus, with no appearance of Tyrannosaurus, but this 1925 film featured Tyrannosaurus anyway, for a more dramatic and spectacular effect.(T. rex didnt actually featured in the book but OBrien made sure there was a role for him in the film, T. rex: A Dinosaur in Hollywood (2005 documentary))Stop motion animator Willis OBrien, who had worked on The Ghost of Slumber Mountain and The Lost World, was again responsible of special effects in the 1933 monster movie King Kong, which featured a climactic battle between the giant ape and a Tyrannosaurus. The Tyrannosaurus model was made using a cast based on an early painting by Charles R. Knight. OBrien stated that the battle between Kong and the Tyrannosaurus was one of the most technically difficult scenes in the film to animate. Many early films depicted Tyrannosaurus with an upright posture based on the current thinking of the time. Most of these films inaccurately portrayed the dinosaur with three prominent fingers on each hand like Allosaurus (though Tyrannosaurus had a third, vestigial finger, it wouldnt have been noticeable at first glance);(T. rexs Missing 3rd Finger Found, Discovery News October 17, 2007.) Disney is reported to have informed dinosaur hunter Brown that it looked better that way. Since that time, T. rex has appeared in a great number of monster films and educational documentaries.(One of the most iconic depictions of Tyrannosaurus in film was in 1993s Jurassic Park, where dinosaurs including T. rex are brought back to life using blood from fossilized mosquitoes. In the film, the dinosaur breaks free of its park enclosure, and proceeds to roam the park while killing some of the visitors and staff it encounters. The popularity of T. rex has long had a reciprocal effect on dinosaur science; the popularity of Jurassic Park factored into the discovery of the dinosaur genus Scipionyx; fossils of this genus had laid in storage in a basement in Italy until the films release attracted attention from the fossil owner.()See also* depictions of dinosaursReferencesen la cultura populartiranosaro en la populara kulturoja:
4444104
Johnston,_Pembrokeshire
    Johnston is a community in the hundred of Roose, Pembrokeshire, Wales.It lies on the road approximately midway between Haverfordwest and the port of Haven and is served by railway station.  Until the end of the 19th century, anthracite was mined here.  The village is now a dormitory for Haverfordwest and Milford Haven, and is reported to be the largest village in Wales.  The church has the typical tall, slim castellated tower of churches in English-speaking England beyond Wales.It is an English speaking village with all shops, school lessons and church/chapel services being in English. Only 13.81% of people can speak Welsh.(http://www.neighbourhood.statistics.gov.uk/dissemination/LeadTableView.do?a7&b6176954&cSA62+3QG&d14&e16&g416058&i1001x1003x1004&m0&r0&s1292424483218&enc1&dsFamilyId197)The village is just over 1 mile long(http://maps.google.co.uk/maps?ll51.7561,-5.000153&spn0.039635,0.077162&th&z14) and almost a mile wide from the furthest main points.(http://maps.google.co.uk/maps?ll51.755648,-4.994187&spn0.019818,0.038581&th&z15)The village is having several new housing developments built, which should help ease the local housing shortage. History  Johnston was founded as a small farming and mining(http://www.visionofbritain.org.uk/data_cube_page.jsp?data_themeT_IND&data_cubeN_OCC_PAR1831&u_id10105547&c_id10001043&addY) village sometime before 1801 when 99 people lived in the village. The population steadily grew to 600 in 1951 and almost doubled in the next 10 years to 1133(http://www.visionofbritain.org.uk/data_cube_page.jsp?data_themeT_POP&data_cubeN_TOT_POP&u_id10105547&c_id10001043&addN). Since then Johnston has had a steady population growth.  Demographics  Johnston is not ethically diverse with 99.55% of the population identifying as White. It is also a majority Christian village with 75.91% of people identifying as a Christian, 0.13% as a Buddhist, 0.13% as a Muslim, 0.13 as Other and 15.78% as No Religion. 7.91% of people did not state a religion. (http://www.neighbourhood.statistics.gov.uk/dissemination/LeadKeyFigures.do?a7&b6176954&cSA62+3QG&d14&e16&g416058&i1001x1003x1004&m0&r0&s1292424483187&enc1)Demography Education Johnston CP School is a primary school with year groups, Nursery to Year 6. It has over 150 pupils. It has been on its current site for approximately 30-35 years. Before then it was at another site in the north of Johnston. Pupils in Secondary Education are automatically enrolled in V.C. School, although parents may opt out of this and send their child to another school. Transport Johnston is served by 9 bus stops, six main with three smaller stops. Buses run to Haverfordwest, Milford Haven, Pembroke, Pembroke Dock and Tenby.railway station serves as a railway link. Trains run in both directions every 2 hours. The station itself is unmanned and is a request stop. Pubs, Restaurants and Hotels Johnston has five pubs, The Vine Inn, also a restaurant, The Silverdale, also a hotel and restaurant, The Railway, The Windsor Hotel, also a hotel and restaurant and Johnston Country Club. Other Johnston also has a wide range of amenities. Namely a 24/7 petrol station, a post office, shop/off licence, doctors surgery, 2 car dealership garages, a church, a chapel, a pharmacy, a fish & chip shop, indian restaurant and takeway, 3 MOT Garages and a hairdressing salon. References   External links *GENUKI page*Photos of Johnston and surrounding area on geograph.org.ukSir Benfro
4453559
Exploration_of_the_Moon
Image:Lunar module AS12-51-7507.jpg|thumb|right|12 module Intrepid prepares to descend towards the surface of the Moon. NASA photo.The physical exploration of the Moon began when 2, a probe launched by the Union, made an impact on the surface of the Moon on September 14, 1959. Prior to that the only available means of exploration had been observation. The invention of the telescope brought about the first leap in the quality of lunar observations. Galilei is generally credited as the first person to use a telescope for astronomical purposes; having made his own telescope in 1609, the mountains and craters on the surface were among his first observations using it.In 1969, NASAs Apollo first successfully landed people on the Moon. They placed scientific experiments there and returned rocks and data that suggested the Moon is of a similar composition to the Earth.Early historyIn Mesopotamia, Babylonian astronomers by the early first millennium BC had discovered a repeating 18-year cycle of eclipses. They had also known by this time that 19 solar years is about equal to 235 lunar months.(postscript) In the 2nd century BC, of Seleucia correctly theorized that tides were caused by the Moon, although he believed that the interaction was mediated by the atmosphere. According to Strabo (1.1.9), Seleucus was the first to state that the tides are due to the attraction of the Moon, and that the height of the tides depends on the Moons position relative to the Sun.()By the mid-first millennium BC, Indian astronomers described the Moons monthly elongation in the Aitareya Brhmana.(Sarma (2008), Astronomy in India) By 499 AD, the Indian astronomer Aryabhata mentioned in his Aryabhatiya that reflected sunlight is the cause behind the shining of the moon.(Hayashi (2008), Aryabhata I)Among the first in the Western world to offer a scientific explanation for the Moon was the Greek philosopher Anaxagoras (d. 428 BC), who reasoned that the Sun and Moon were both giant spherical rocks, and that the latter reflected the light of the former. His atheistic view of the heavens was one cause for his imprisonment and eventual exile.() In Aristotles (384322 BC) description of the universe, the Moon marked the boundary between the spheres of the mutable elements (earth, water, air and fire), and the imperishable stars of aether. This separation was held to be part of physics for many centuries after.()In the philosophy of Aristotle, the heavens, starting at the Moon, were the realm of perfection, the sublunary region was the realm of change and corruption, and any resemblance between these regions was strictly ruled out. Aristotle himself suggested that the Moon partook perhaps of some contamination from the realm of corruption.( ) In his little book On the Face in the Moons Orb, Plutarch expressed rather different views on the relationship between the Moon and Earth. He suggested that the Moon had deep recesses in which the light of the Sun did not reach and that the spots are nothing but the shadows of rivers or deep chasms. He also entertained the possibility that the Moon was inhabited. It had been suggested already in antiquity that the Moon was a perfect mirror and that its markings were reflections of earthly features, but this explanation was easily dismissed because the face of the Moon never changes as it moves about the Earth.( The explanation that finally became standard was that there were variations of density in the Moon that caused this otherwise perfectly spherical body to appear the way it does.( The perfection of the Moon, and therefore the heavens, was thus preserved.Aristarchus went a step further and computed the distance from Earth, together with its size, obtaining a value of 20 times the radius for the distance (the real value is 60; the Earth radius was roughly known since Eratosthenes).During the States of China, astronomer Shen (fl. 4th century BC) gave instructions for predicting solar and lunar eclipses based on the relative positions of the Moon and Sun.() Although the Chinese of the Dynasty (202 BC202 AD) believed the Moon to be energy equated to qi, their radiating influence theory recognized that the light of the Moon was merely a reflection of the Sun (mentioned by Anaxagoras above).() This was supported by mainstream thinkers such as Fang (7837 BC) and Heng (78139 AD), but it was also opposed by the influential philosopher Chong (2797 AD).( Jing Fang noted the sphericity of the Moon, while Zhang Heng accurately described a lunar eclipse and solar eclipse.(() These assertions were supported by Kuo (10311095) of the Dynasty (9601279) who created an allegory equating the waxing and waning of the Moon to a round ball of reflective silver that, when doused with white powder and viewed from the side, would appear to be a crescent.() He also noted that the reason for the Sun and Moon not eclipsing every time their paths met was because of a small obliquity in their orbital paths.(al-Hasib al-Marwazi, a Persian astronomer,  conducted various observations at the Al-Shammisiyyah observatory in Baghdad between 825 and 835 AD.() Using these observations, he estimated the Moons diameter as 3,037 km (equivalent to 1,519 km radius) and its distance from the Earth as 215,209 miles, which come close to the currently accepted values.() In 1021, the Islamic physicist, Alhazen, accurately explained the illusion in the of Optics, which stated that judging the distance of an object depends on there being an uninterrupted sequence of intervening bodies between the object and the observer. With the Moon, there are no intervening objects, therefore since the size of an object depends on its observed distance, which is in this case inaccurate, the Moon appears larger on the horizon. Through Alhazens work, the Moon illusion gradually came to be accepted as a psychological phenomenon.() He also investigated moonlight, which he proved through experimentation that it originates from sunlight and correctly concluded that it emits light from those portions of its surface which the suns light strikes.()By the Ages, before the invention of the telescope, an increasing number of people began to recognise the Moon as a sphere, though many believed that it was perfectly smooth.() In 1609, Galilei drew one of the first telescopic drawings of the Moon in his book  and noted that it was not smooth but had mountains and craters. Later in the 17th century, Battista Riccioli and Maria Grimaldi drew a map of the Moon and gave many craters the names they still have today. On maps, the dark parts of the Moons surface were called maria (singular mare) or seas, and the light parts were called terrae or continents.The medieval followers of Aristotle, in the Islamic world and then in Christian Europe, tried to make sense of the lunar spots in Aristotelian terms.( Harriot, as well as Galilei, drew the first telescopic representation of the Moon and observed it for several years. His drawings, however, remained unpublished.( The first map of the Moon was made by the Belgian cosmographer and astronomer Florent van Langren in 1645.( Two years later a much more influential effort was published by Hevelius. In 1647 Hevelius published Selenographia, the first treatise entirely devoted to the Moon. Heveliuss nomenclature, although used in Protestant countries until the eighteenth century, was replaced by the system published in 1651 by the Jesuit astronomer Battista Riccioli, who gave the large naked-eye spots the names of seas and the telescopic spots (now called craters) the name of philosophers and astronomers.( In 1753 the Croatian Jesuit and astronomer Joseph Boscovich discovered the absence of atmosphere on the Moon. In 1824 von Gruithuisen explained the formation of craters as a result of meteorite strikes.()The possibility that the Moon contains vegetation and is inhabited by selenites was seriously considered by major astronomers even into the first decades of the 19th century. The contrast between the brighter highlands and darker maria create the patterns seen by different cultures as the in the Moon, the rabbit and the buffalo, among others.In 1835, the Moon Hoax fooled some people into thinking that there were exotic animals living on the Moon.() Almost at the same time however (during 18341836), Beer and Heinrich Mdler were publishing their four-volume  and the book  in 1837, which firmly established the conclusion that the Moon has no bodies of water nor any appreciable atmosphere.Space raceImage:Lunokhod 1.jpg|thumb|right|200px|1The War-inspired race and race between the Union and the United States of America accelerated with a focus on the Moon. This included many scientifically important firsts, such as the first photographs of the then-unseen side of the Moon in 1959 by the Soviet Union, and culminated with the landing of the first humans on the Moon in 1969, widely seen around the world as one of the pivotal events of the 20th century, and indeed of human history in general.landing map.jpg|thumb|left|Landing map of Apollo, Surveyor and Luna missions.Image:Moon-apollo17-schmitt boulder.jpg|thumb|200px|right|17 astronaut Schmitt standing next to a boulder at Taurus-Littrow during the third EVA (extravehicular activity). NASA photo.The first man-made object to reach the Moon was the unmanned Soviet probe 2, which made a hard landing on September 14, 1959, at 21:02:24 Z. The far side of the Moon was first photographed on October 7, 1959 by the Soviet probe 3. In an effort to compete with these Soviet successes, U.S. President F. Kennedy proposed the national goal of landing a man on the Moon. Speaking to a Joint Session of Congress on May 25, 1961, he said First, I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the earth. No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind, or more important for the long-range exploration of space.(Special Message to the Congress on Urgent National Needs Page 4 - John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum)  The Soviets nonetheless remained in the lead for some time. 9 was the first probe to soft land on the Moon and transmit pictures from the Lunar surface on February 3, 1966. It was proven that a lunar lander would not sink into a thick layer of dust, as had been feared. The first artificial satellite of the Moon was the Soviet probe 10 (launched March 31, 1966). One of the main impediments to human exploration of the Moon was development of adequate shield technology to permit re-entry without completely burning up a manned spacecraft. The U.S. gained early supremacy in this field through NASA research in thermogravimetric experiments in hypersonic tunnels.On December 24, 1968, the crew of 8, Borman, James Lovell and Anders, became the first human beings to enter lunar orbit and see the far side of the Moon in person. Humans first landed on the Moon on July 20, 1969. The first man to walk on the lunar  surface was Armstrong, commander of the U.S. mission 11. The first robot rover to land on the Moon was the Soviet vessel 1 on November 17, 1970 as part of the program.  To date, the last man to stand on the Moon was Cernan, who as part of the mission 17 walked on the Moon in December 1972. See also: A full list of lunar Apollo astronauts.Moon rock samples were brought back to Earth by three Luna missions (16, 20, and 24) and the Apollo missions 11 through 17 (excepting 13, which aborted its planned lunar landing).From the mid-1960s to the mid-1970s there were 65 Moon landings (with 10 in 1971 alone), but after 24 in 1976 they suddenly stopped. The Soviet Union started focusing on Venus and stations and the U.S. on Mars and beyond, on Skylab and Shuttle programs.Before moon race US had a avan-projects of scientific and military moonbases of von Braun, Project, Horizon. Besides the manned landings, abandoned Soviet moon program included a building the multipurpose moonbase Zvezda, first detailed such project with developed mockups of expedition vehicles(LEK Lunar Expeditionary Complex) and surface modules.(DLB Module)Recent explorationIn 1990 Japan visited the Moon with the Hiten spacecraft, becoming the third country to place an object in orbit around the Moon. The spacecraft released the Hagoromo probe into lunar orbit, but the transmitter failed, thereby preventing further scientific use of the mission.  In September 2007, Japan launched the SELENE spacecraft, with the objectives to obtain scientific data of the lunar origin and evolution and to develop the technology for the future lunar exploration, according to the JAXA official website.()The BMDO and NASA launched the mission in 1994, and Prospector in 1998.The Space Agency launched a small, low-cost lunar orbital probe called 1 on September 27, 2003. SMART 1s primary goal was to take three-dimensional X-ray and infrared imagery of the lunar surface. SMART 1 entered lunar orbit on November 15, 2004 and continued to make observations until September 3, 2006, when it was intentionally crashed into the lunar surface in order to study the impact plume.()The Republic of China has begun the program for exploring the Moon and is investigating the prospect of lunar mining, specifically looking for the isotope helium-3 for use as an energy source on Earth.( ) China launched the 1 robotic lunar orbiter on October 24, 2007. Originally planned for a one-year mission, the Change 1 mission was very successful and ended up being extended for another four months. On March 1, 2009, Change 1 was intentionally impacted on the lunar surface completing the 16 month mission.On October 1, 2010, China launched the 2 lunar orbiter.Indias national space agency, Space Research Organization (ISRO),  launched Chandrayaan-1, an unmanned lunar orbiter, on October 22, 2008.(http://www.ndtv.com/convergence/ndtv/Moonmission/Election_Story.aspx?idNEWEN20080069654) The lunar probe was originally intended to orbit the Moon for two years, with scientific objectives to prepare a three-dimensional atlas of the near and far side of the Moon and to conduct a chemical and mineralogical mapping of the lunar surface.()(http://www.deccanherald.com/CONTENT/Sep192008/national2008091890838.asp) The unmanned Impact Probe landed on the Moon at 15:04 GMT on November 14, 2008 () making India the fourth country to touch down on the lunar surface. Among its many achievements was the discovery of the widespread presence of water molecules in lunar soil.(Lunar Missions Detect Water on Moon)NASA launched a preliminary unmanned mission, the Reconnaissance Orbiter, on June 18, 2009. LRO will take high resolution imagery of the Moons surface and carries the Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS), which will investigate the possible existence of water in Cabeus crater.Future plansFile:LRO 2006.jpg|thumb|right|The NASA Reconnaissance OrbiterFollowing to the abandoned US program, plans for manned flights followed by moonbases were declared by Russia, Europe (ESA), China, Japan and India. All of them intend to continue the exploration of Moon with more unmanned spacecraft.China plans to land the rover 3 on the Moon in 2012() or 2013, and to conduct a return mission in 2017. If successful, Change 3 will be the first spacecraft to land on lunar surface, since 24 in 1976.India expects to launch another indigenous lunar mission by 2013 which would place a motorized rover on the surface of the Moon.()Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) plans a manned lunar landing around 2020 that would lead to a manned lunar base by 2030; however, there is no budget yet for this project and plan reverts to robotic missions.()Russia also announced to resume its previously frozen project Luna-Glob, an unmanned lander and orbiter, which is slated to launch in 2012.()Germany also announced in March 2007 that it will launch a national lunar orbiter, LEO in 2012.() However the mission was cancelled due to budgetary constraints.(http://www.n-tv.de/Nur_gucken_Nicht_anfassen_MondMission_geplatzt/120720081208/992885.html)In August 2007, NASA stated that all future missions and explorations of the Moon will be done entirely using the metric system. This was done to improve cooperation with space agencies of other countries which already use the metric system.(NASA - Metric Moon)The Space Agency has also announced its intention to send a manned mission to the Moon, as part of the programme. In September 2010 the agency introduces a Lunar lander programme with a target of autonomous mission to the moon in 2018.(http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMUV2KOXDG_index_0.html)On September 13, 2007, the Prize Foundation, in concert with Google, Inc., announced the Lunar X Prize. This contest requires competitors to land a privately funded robotic rover on the Moon that is capable of completing several mission objectives, including roaming the lunar surface for at least 500 meters and sending video, images and data back to the Earth.()Timeline of Moon explorationFuture missions See also *of the Moon*Helium-3*of lunar probes*of artificial objects on the Moon*landing*Apollo*exploration of the Moon*of Solar System explorationReferencesExternal links*Lunar mission timeline - NASA*Recent Lunar missions - NASA*Exploring the Moon - A history of lunar discovery from the first space probes to recent times*Another Hit to Hoax:Traces of Man on Lunar Surfacelunarsde la Lunade la Lune bulandella Lunabulanja:valloituksen aikajanasv:Mnfrd
4459575
Roderic_Dallas
laterwork Roderic Stanley (Stan) Dallas DSO, DSC & Bar (30 July 1891  1 June 1918) was an Australian fighter ace of War I. His score of aerial victories is generally regarded as the second-highest by an Australian, after Robert Little; however there is considerable dispute over Dallass exact total. While his official score is commonly given as 39, claim-by-claim analyses list as few as 32, and other research credits him with over 50, compared to Littles official tally of 47. Like Little, Dallas flew with British units, rather than the Flying Corps. Beyond his personal triumphs in combat, Dallas achieved success as a squadron leader, both in the air and on the ground. He was also an influential tactician and test pilot who trialled the latest British aeroplanes and flying equipment. His service spanned almost the entirety of World War I fighter aviation.Born on a remote property in rural Queensland, Dallas showed an early interest in aviation. He travelled to England at his own expense following the outbreak of World War I and became a pilot in the Naval Air Service (RNAS) in August 1915. Initially seeing action with No. 1 Naval Wing on the Western Front in Caudrons and 11s, he was chosen to test one of the earliest Triplanes. This became his favourite type, and he achieved many victories with it through 191617, earning the Service Order, and the Distinguished Service Cross and Bar. Appointed Commanding Officer of No. 1 Squadron RNAS (formerly No. 1 Wing) in June 1917, he transferred to the newly established Air Force on 1 April 1918, taking charge of No. 40 Squadron. Flying Aircraft Factory S.E.5s, he achieved further victories before being killed in action on 1 June 1918 while on patrol near Livin in northern France. He was buried in Pernes.Early lifeStan Dallas was born on 30 July 1891 at Mount Stanley station outside Esk, Queensland, to labourer Peter MacArthur Dallas and his wife Honora.(Dallas, Roderic Stanley (18911918) at Dictionary of Biography. Retrieved on 18 February 2010.) Mount Stanley was an isolated property, and journeys to and from Esk were long and infrequent; Stan was the first Caucasian child born at the station.(Garrisson, Australian Fighter Aces, pp. 5156)(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 1112) His family moved to Tenterfield, New South Wales, soon after the birth of his younger brother in 1893.(( They returned to Queensland in 1898, settling in Mount Morgan, where Peter Dallas became a shift boss at the local mines.((Firkins, The Golden Eagles, pp. 4143) Stan attended Mount Morgan Boys School from February 1899 and eventually joined its cadet corps, rising to Sergeant.(  At school he was noted for his intelligence, ability to get along well with others, and quiet sense of humour. He enjoyed the outdoors, and spent many hours in the mountains behind his familys home, observing birds of prey.(In July 1907, Dallas joined the office of the Mount Morgan Gold Mining Company, and also enrolled in the local technical college, where he took night classes in chemistry and technical drawing. He showed an early interest in aviation, fuelled by the establishment in 1911 of the Mount Morgan chapter of the Queensland Aero Club.( Dallas and his younger brother Norvel built a glider, which was wrecked by an untimely gust of wind the first time they tried to launch it. The two brothers continued to build model gliders after this initial disaster, however, and Stan corresponded with pioneer aviators in France, England, and the United States.( He later transferred to a higher-paying job driving trucks for Iron Island ironstone quarries. Stan and Norvel once again built their own flying machine while Stan was working on Iron Island. They experimented with this seaplane on nearby Marble Island, notorious for its treacherous waters; Stan lost this aeroplane in the sea.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 1314) At  tall, and weighing , Dallas would later surprise observers with his ability to fit into the cramped cockpits of fighter planes. Despite his size, he was considered a fine athlete with quick reflexes.(Ferkins, The Golden Eagles, pp. 4752) Although he could project a loud speaking voice, he was generally soft-spoken and was not known to curse or drink alcohol, nor often to smoke.( Dallas stayed fit through regular exercise at the gym, and played union football. He had exceptionally keen eyesight, which he had trained by reading small print in newspapers at the six-foot length of his familys table. To balance out athletics, he participated in amateur theatrics, where his strong voice served him well.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 1213)Service historyRise to flying aceDallas joined the Port Curtis Militia in 1913, and was commissioned as a Lieutenant prior to the outbreak of War I.((Newton, Australian Air Aces, pp. 3234) Believing he had little chance of gaining a place in the newly established Flying Corps, he applied to join the British Flying Corps (RFC), but was rejected. Undaunted, he travelled from Queensland to Melbourne, where he impressed Minister Without Portfolio J.A. Jensen. Jensen gave the young aspirant a letter of introduction to the Australian High Commissioner in London, Sir George Reid. Dallas paid his own passage to England and, once there, applied again to the RFC.(( Rejected again, he turned to the Naval Air Service (RNAS) and was accepted, topping the entrance examination over 83 other students. He was commissioned a Flight Sub-Lieutenant and began training at Hendon in June 1915, gaining Pilots License #1512 on 5 August.(( On 3 December, he began flying combat missions in Dunkirk, France, as a member of No. 1 Naval Wing (later redesignated as No. 1 Squadron), which operated two-seat Caudrons and single-seat 11s.(( Early in his career with No. 1 Squadron, a practical jokester imitating the squadrons Commanding Officer telephoned Dallas, who was the duty officer, and peremptorily ordered him to take off in a propellerless Breguet. Upon learning that he had been tricked, Dallas joined in the laughter. He not only accepted the resulting nickname of Breguet, but also used it as a signature on his letters home later in the war.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 3536, 112) Having made two unconfirmed claims in February 1916, Dallas scored his first confirmed victory on 23 April. He outmaneuvred a German Aviatik C and shot it out of control, following his victim down to 2,000 feet, though heavy anti-aircraft fire holed his plane in several places.((Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 4344) He went on to score three more confirmed victories with his Nieuport.(Franks, Nieuport Aces of World War 1, p. 32)On 23 June 1916, Dallas took delivery of the newest RNAS fighter, Triplane #N500. This was the original prototype, having undergone Admiralty trials before being shipped to France. Though still only a test plane, it was flown into combat 15 minutes after its arrival.((Franks, Sopwith Triplane Aces of World War 1, p. 6) Dallas named it Brown Bread, and it was the first of a series of Tripes that he would fly and fight in over the next year. He won his first victory with Brown Bread on 1 July, the same day he was promoted to Lieutenant. Three days later, he was recommended for further promotion. He scored his last Nieuport-mounted kill on 9 July, earning the Croix de guerre and a in Despatches for coming to the aid of a French Maurice Farman biplane.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 6266) On 7 September 1916, Dallas was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross, for the specially gallant manner in which he has carried out his duties since first seeing action in December 1915.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, p. 71)(London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 29736, p. 8768, 6 September 1916. Retrieved on 28 February 2010.) By the end of the year he was among the earliest RNAS aces, with eight confirmed and four unconfirmed victories, and had been raised to the rank of Flight Commander.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 71, 192)Dallas became one of the best-known pilots of Sopwith Triplanes in the RNAS. He opened 1917 by setting an altitude record of 26,000 feet in the Triplane while testing a prototype oxygen set; he endured frostbite and oxygen intoxication in the process.( By now No. 1 Squadron had totally re-equipped with production Triplanes. It also shifted airfields from Veurne in Belgium to Chipilly in France, leaving behind RNAS control by transferring to No. 14 Wing, 4th Brigade of the RFC. Formation flying became the order of the day, as the practice of fighter pilots soloing into combat dwindled.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 8689) The last three weeks of March were also filled with Dallass responsibilities for flight and gunnery testing.( As British losses in the air began to mount during April, Dallas and his squadron moved airfields once again, to La Bellevue. They were thus positioned to take a prominent part in the subsequent Battle of Arras, where the intense aerial fighting saw Dallas add to his burgeoning score.((Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 94101) The combat of 23 April became known as one of the classic air battles of the war. Dallas and his wingman Culling took on a squadron-sized formation of 14 German aircraft, having gained an altitude edge over their foes. The naval aces exploited this edge by making quick diving attacks from opposite sides, culminating in short bursts of machine-gun fire. Using the Triplanes superior climbing ability, they would then bob back up to position themselves for the next assault. In contrast to the usual hit-and-run tactics of most dogfights, the RNAS duo launched at least 20 gunnery runs over 45 minutes. The Germans were forced progressively lower, into disarray, and then chased back over their own lines.(( While they shot down three of the Germans, Dallas and Culling also achieved a more important outcome by blocking and then breaking up a determined enemy effort against the British ground offensive.( The action led to the award of a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross for Dallas, and a Distinguished Service Cross for Culling, which were gazetted on 29 June.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, p. 103)(London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 30147, pp. 62566257, 29 June 1917. Retrieved on 28 February 2010.)Squadron commandBy June 1917, Dallas had achieved over 20 victories in aerial combat. This experience, and his leadership ability, led to his appointment as Commanding Officer of No. 1 Naval Squadron on 23 June 1917.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, p. 192) The unit had been forced to cut back its operational strength from 18 aircraft to 15 due to lack of pilot replacements and a shortage of spare parts for the aging Triplanes.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 119 120) It had also moved airfields, to an unprepared site at Bailleul. As a leader, Dallas made a point of shepherding new pilots through their first flights, and even setting them up with their first victories by manouvring enemy aircraft into a good position for the rookie to take a shot.((Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 122123, 128129, 132)  On the ground, he proved to be an efficient organiser, designing and directing construction of the new air base. It was also during this time that he wrote a treatise on air combat tactics, extracts of which have survived. Both the air base layout and the treatise displayed his talent as a sketch artist.( On 2 November, No. 1 Squadron moved airfields once more, to Middle Aerodrome, which put it back under overall RNAS control. The unit received its first eight new Camels on 9 November as replacements for the Triplanes. On 11 November, Dallas was again Mentioned in Despatches, this time by Field Marshal Haig. After gaining its full complement of Camels, No. 1 Squadron was transferred to England, and took up home defence duties at Dover.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 132135) On 16 February 1918, Dallas led his squadron back to France, where it was based at Tteghem, supporting units on operations along the Belgian coast.((Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, p. 141) He commanded it for another six weeks, until 31 March.(  As part of the amalgamation of the RFC and RNAS to form the Air Force, on 1 April 1918 Dallas was promoted to Major and given command of No. 40 Squadron RAF, flying Aircraft Factory S.E.5s.((Shores, British and Empire Aces of World War 1, p.71) The squadron boasted a number of aces in its ranks, and its former RFC members were suspicious of Dallass naval background. However, he was able to overcome their misgivings and established himself as the new CO with his personal demeanour and courage; the nickname of Admiral that they bestowed upon him was an affectionate one.((Hart, Aces Falling, pp. 154156) Ten days after taking over, he had adapted well enough to his new mount with its inline engine to score his first victory with his new unit. His men also saw that he would not only look out for his rookie pilots, but would not shirk the dangers of ground attack sorties. His offhand attitude toward two leg wounds he received during a strafing mission on 14 April, after which he made a perfect landing, especially impressed his subordinates, as did his appreciation of all ranks for their hard work.((Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 142144, 146149) His studious bent continued to serve him; he kept notes on his methods of attacking enemy aircraft, which often exploited their structural weaknesses, and used them to tutor pilots under his command.((Dallas was briefly hospitalised with the wounds to his thigh and heel on 14 April, but snuck out four days later to rejoin his squadron. His departure may have been spurred by news of the capture of his friend Minifie. As soon as he was able, Dallas was flying again.((Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 149150) By 26 April, he had increased his official score to 37, and been awarded the Service Order for operations at Dunkirk.((London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 30654, page 5059, 23 April 1918. Retrieved on 28 February 2010.) He had also several times been recommended for the Cross, but it was never approved.((Ferkins, The Golden Eagles, p. 55) His casual attitude towards claiming victories was noted by a member of No. 40 Squadron, Cecil Usher, who related that Dallas once remarked of an opponent, ...he went down belching a lot of black smoke and after he had gone down someways one of his planes came off, but I didnt see him crash so I shant claim him.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, p. 167) On 2 May, during a lull in the fighting at Flanders, Dallas took off in his S.E.5 to engage in a taunting practical joke on his foes. He strafed the German base at La Brayelle to attract attention before dropping a package on the aerodrome with a note reading, If you wont come up here and fight, herewith a pair of boots for work on the ground, pilots for the use of. He then circled in mist until troops came to examine the bundle, whereupon he dropped two bombs and again shot up the base, causing general panic.(Hart, Aces Falling, pp. 162163)(Franks, SE5/5a Aces of World War 1, pp. 3031) News of this singular exploit reportedly provoked laughter from Field Marshal Haig and RAF founder General Sir Hugh Trenchard, two men not known for their sense of humour.( While adding to his score and leading his squadron into combat, Dallas had begun thinking beyond the war. He was pleading with his father to quit the dangerous job of mining, with hints that he would support his parents by pioneering aviation in Australia.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, p. 156)  He also harboured a long-standing ambition of flying from England back to Australia, which would be a record-setting journey.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 138140)Death and legacyDallas was raised to Colonel and appointed to the command of a wing, but would never see the message from headquarters that arrived on 1 June 1918 advising him of the promotion and ordering him to cease flying.((Hart, Aces falling, pp. 182183) He disappeared on a solo mission the same day. It was later learned that he had been killed over Lievin during combat with three Fokker Triplanes from Jagdstaffel 14, probably by its Commander, Leutnant Johannes Werner.( There are various theories as to how he died. The common elements are that he was on patrol near the front line when he pounced on a German plane flying at a lower level, that there might have been another unknown British pilot in trouble, and that the Germans who shot Dallas down had dived from a still higher altitude.((Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 168171) Medics near his crash site at Absalom Trench ventured into mans land and retrieved his body, while a patrol of eight volunteers salvaged his personal effects from the fallen aircraft.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, p. 173) News of Dallass death was greeted with shock and disbelief by his squadron, one pilot recording:(The British magazine Aeroplane later paid tribute to him in an editorial:(For his record in aerial combat and his leadership skills, Dallas has been compared to the Red Baron, von Richthofen. The former flew combat for 29 months, and the latter for 31 months, if his three months in hospital are deducted. Dallas successfully led two different squadrons during his career, and was killed just before assuming command of a wing. Richthofen led first a squadron, then a wing during his 12 months in command, again excluding hospital time; he achieved more victories, but had the tactical advantage of fighting over his own lines with the wind in his favour. Dallas flew a score of different types of Allied aircraft, as well as captured German planes;(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 142, 199) he was also instrumental in developing the Sopwith Triplane. Richthofen flew the Fokker copy of the Sopwith, and helped develop the D.VII, but did not live to fly it into battle.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, p. 181) Stan Dallas was buried at the Pernes British Cemetery, France, in Lot 38, Row E of Plot II.(Roderick Stanley Dallas at Commonwealth War Graves Commission. Retrieved on 28 February 2010.)(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, p. 176) In addition to his military decorations, he was honoured with a Gold Medal by the de France, and a Bronze Medal and Diploma by the Club of America.(( The town of Toogoolawah, Queensland, commemorated him in the name of its airport, and the national capitol of Canberra remembered him with Dallas Place. His home town of Mount Morgan has dedicated a water reservoir in his honour; its Historical Society Museum holds his medals, uniform, and sword, as well the propeller from one of his planes.((List of victoriesHistorians have struggled to develop a definitive list of Dallass victories; Adrian Hellwig, in the bibliography to his 2006 biography, lists over a dozen previous historians that have investigated the subject.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 196, 212) He also refers to his difficulties in reconciling previous accounts.(Hellwig, Australian Hawk Over the Western Front, pp. 77, 95101, 109, 112, 120121) While various claim-by-claim analyses ascribe Dallas a score of 32 aircraft shot down,((Shores et al, Above the Trenches, p. 132) he was officially credited with 39, and with being second only to Robert Littlewho was credited with 47among Australian aces.(((Wilson, The Brotherhood of Airmen, p. 31)   However, Dallass unofficial tally has been estimated at over 50.(( This list is a compilation of claim-by-claim analyses that follow, as much as possible, the British system of confirming victory: pilot log entries and/or combat reports did not count, unless verified by squadron or higher levels of command. Thus, inclusion of a confirmed victory in this list has depended on verification by the Squadron Record Book, and/or by RNAS/RAF Communique or other reliable secondary source verification. Victories not confirmed by these methods are marked u/c.NotesReferences************DallasDallasStanley Dallas
4465315
John_Hotaling
John Ritter Hotaling (March 3, 1824 &ndash; October 12(St. Louis Globe-Democrat; October 12, 1886; Obituary Maj. John R. HOTALING. http://www.newspaperabstracts.com/link.php?id41468), 1886) was an American soldier, engineer, and businessman. He served as a dragoon in the War and as a cavalry officer and senior staff member of General John Logans during the Civil War. After the war, Hotaling was elected postmaster of Rochelle, Illinois; a position he occupied for 15 years, after which he retired and moved his family to Huron. He died there in 1886 of a heart attack.Early Life and careerHotaling was born in New York, the eldest of ten children. His father, Robert (17961886), was a farmer and at the age of 15, the younger Hotaling began training in printing. After completing 18 months of his apprenticeship, Hotalings father allowed his son to move to York City, where he began working in a printing office. After a year of employment, Hotaling traveled to Europe; visiting Antwerp, Rotterdam, and other European cities, possibly while doing genealogy research. Upon returning to New York, he took work in a wire factory for several years.On March 20, 1847, Hotaling enlisted in the NY militia as a dragoon, with the intention of serving in the Mexican-American War. Hotaling landed in Veracruz as part of the army that was under the command of General Scott, and fought his way inland toward Mexico city. During guerrilla action in the for Mexico City, he was severely wounded by a slash to the throat and would have died, were it not for the medical attention of a fellow soldier. On July 21, 1848, Hotaling was discharged due to the end of the war.In 1849, at the height of the Gold Rush, Hotaling, now a civilian and veteran, accompanied 60 other men on a trip to California by sea. Their ship proved to be very cumbersome, and they were forced to dock for a period in Brazil, where they were invited guests at the birthday celebration of Brazilian Emperor Pedro II. Eight months after initially setting sail, the group finally arrived in California. Hotaling lived for two years in California, but then returned to New York.He married Sophia Waterhouse of Brooklyn, and the newlywed couple moved West, settling in Illinois, where they lived as farmers. In 1852, Hotaling was contracted to build a two-mile stretch of track through Ogle County. In 1855, Hotaling built what was said to be the first brick building in Lane, Illinois (now Rochelle): a three-story office building which also included an elevator.Civil WarIn 1861, at the start of the Civil War, Hotaling helped raise a company of Union cavalrymen that was recognized by the Army as Co. A, 2nd Illinois Cavalry Regiment. His brother Nick, who had also moved to Ogle County from New York, enlisted and served along with him. Three of Hotalings other brothers served in Eastern Regiments. Hotaling, newly commissioned as a captain, was one of the commanding officers of Company A. He would also command company B of the same regiment at various times. Union General Grant made frequent use of both companies in battle, considering them very mobile and efficient. Hotalings skill later caught the eye of Union General Ord, who appointed Hotaling and his men as his personal escort group. Hotaling commanded both companies A & B at the of Fort Donelson. Hotaling and Capt. Larison commanded 126 men in the of Shiloh. On November 19, 1863, Hotaling was promoted to the rank of major. After Ord was wounded, Hotaling and his men served as escort to Union General A. Logan, who later appointed Hotaling as his personal chief of staff. In the summer of 1864, Major Hotaling served under Logan in the ranks of the XV Corps in the of Atlanta. As a part of the Atlanta force, Hotaling may have taken part in Shermans march to the sea; though, since General Logan had temporarily passed command of the XVth to General Howard after Atlanta, it is not certain. Major Hotaling did serve under General Logan once more in the Campaign.Those who served with and under Hotaling regarded him as a born leader; charismatic, intelligent, and friendly. There soon began talk within the higher ranks of promoting Hotaling to the rank of Colonel and a command of his own, but Logan so well-liked his adjutant that he would hear nothing of it. Hotaling was repeatedly passed over for promotions, and would stay at his rank of Major until the end of the war. After the war, during Army reunions, Logan was regularly heard praising Hotalings bravery and resourcefulness. In 1868, General Charles C. Walcott said of Hotaling: Our forces owed their success before Atlanta more to him than any other man. In February 1863, Hotaling received word that his wife Sophia had died in Illinois of tuberculosis.Postbellum careerHotaling retired from service after the war and returned to Illinois, where he married a 39 year old widow named Carrie Cass on December 9, 1868. In the fall of 1869, Hotaling was elected postmaster of Rochelle, a position he occupied until 1884. In 1871, Hotaling appointed his wife postmistress tempore and ventured to Central America, lured by an opportunity in the railroad business. However, the tropical environment proved too harsh for Hotaling, and he returned to the States after six months. In February 1874, perhaps nostalgic about his earlier experiences in Brazil & California, Hotaling traveled to South America with an interest in gold mining. The climate and complex obstacles involved in the trade took their toll once more, and Hotaling returned home after a mere two months. It would be his last known expedition outside the United States. In the 1880s, after purchasing some land in the Territory, Hotaling moved to Huron but died of a heart attack in 1886, at the age of 62. His body was returned to Rochelle, where it is buried in the Lawnridge Cemetery. His grave, to this day, is routinely decorated on Day. A 2004 article in the Rochelle News-Leader suggested Hotaling may have played a part in the holidays creation, due to his close work relationship with General Logan (Logan is regarded as a founding father of Memorial Day); however, evidence of this claim is scant.Hotaling had two children with his first wife Sophia, and one son with his second wife Carrie.References Further reading * Fletcher, Samuel and D.H. Fletcher. The History of Company A, Second Illinois Cavalry. Chicago: Unknown Publisher. 1912. (pp. 202212)
